      About Undergraduate Studies | Undergraduate Studies
            People Search
        Degree Search
Browse by school    
        Course Search
Search class sections | Online courses
        Library Search
Libraries | Hours &amp; locations | Ask
    Advising | Catalog | Tutors
    Writing Center | Math help room
    Finals Schedule | GPA Calculator
          CMS Login: KU Users | Non-KU Users
    KU Home
    About KU
    Admissions
    Athletics
    Alumni
    Campuses
    Social Media
    Endowment
    KU Today
                                Undergraduate Studies
      Search form
  Search 
      Home
Mission
People
Units
UNIV Courses
Contact
      MenuHome
Mission
People
Units
UNIV Courses
Contact
Search
      Search form
  Search 
Welcome to Undergraduate Studies!
Our programs work together to advance the academic mission of the University of Kansas. We support the intellectual engagement and pursuit of learning by all KU students throughout their undergraduate education, from orientation through graduation.
As students develop their educational goals and career interests, we provide guidance and academic support, including advising, tutoring, and writing consultation, and we ensure an accessible learning environment.  We encourage and facilitate participation in the experiential learning opportunities that are an integral component of a well-rounded undergraduate education, such as undergraduate research, internships, and service learning, and we contribute to the Experiential Learning Collaborative, a work group devoted to developing, expanding, and promoting experiential learning at KU.  We partner with the Libraries and KU Information Technology in the Learning Studio, a dynamic student-oriented space in Anschutz Library where students can study, conduct research, and access academic support services.  Working with departments throughout the university, we are helping to implement the KU Core, which establishes new university-wide educational goals and learning outcomes.
As part of Academic Affairs, within the Office of the Provost, we serve the university as a whole, coordinating with faculty, staff, and students throughout KU to further educational initiatives and strategic goals.
Our programs include:
Academic Achievement and Access Center
	Center for Civic and Social Responsibility
	Center for Undergraduate Research
	KU Info
	KU Writing Center
	Office of First-Year Experience
	Undergraduate Advising Center
	University Career Center
      Undergraduate Studies is committed to supporting and serving all members of the KU community. We strive to create a campus environment free of discrimination. As an advocate for students, please reach out to any member of our Undergraduate Studies staff if you feel unsafe or unwelcome on campus. We hear you. You matter. We care. We stand with you.
      KU Core
The KU Core stretches across the undergraduate experience, yielding fundamental skills, building a broad background of knowledge, generating capacities and opportunities for blending and creating ideas, strengthening an appreciation of cultural and global diversity, and cultivating ethical integrity. Each of our six educational goals has one or more distinct learning outcomes.
KUCore
      Bold Aspirations
Bold Aspirations is the strategic plan for KU, comprising individual plans for the Lawrence and Edwards campuses and for the medical center.
KUBoldAspirations
            Why KU
                                    Apply &raquo;
                                            One of 34 U.S. public institutions in the prestigious Association of American Universities
                                            26 prestigious Rhodes Scholars &mdash; more than all other Kansas colleges combined
                                            Nearly $290 million in financial aid annually
                                            44 nationally ranked graduate programs.
&mdash;U.S. News &amp; World Report
                                            Top 50 nationwide for size of library collection.
&mdash;ALA
                                            23rd nationwide for service to veterans
&mdash;"Best for Vets," Military Times
    KU Today
        Give to KU &raquo;
      Contact Undergraduate Studies
                    undergraduatestudies@ku.edu
                            785-864-4907
        Strong Hall, Room 156
1450 Jayhawk Blvd.
Lawrence, KS 66045    
      Academic Affairs, Office of the Provost
academicaffairs.ku.edu
    Academics
    Admissions
    Alumni
    Athletics
    Campuses
    Giving
    Jobs
      Contact KU
Lawrence, KS | Maps    
    The University of Kansas prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, ethnicity, religion, sex, national origin, age, ancestry, disability, status as a veteran, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, gender identity, gender expression, and genetic information in the university’s programs and activities. Retaliation is also prohibited by university policy. The following persons have been designated to handle inquiries regarding the nondiscrimination policies and are the Title IX coordinators for their respective campuses: Executive Director of the Office of Institutional Opportunity & Access, IOA@ku.edu, 1246 West Campus Road, Room 153A, Lawrence, KS 66045, 785-864-6414, 711 TTY (for the Lawrence, Edwards, Parsons, Yoder, and Topeka campuses); Director, Equal Opportunity Office, Mail Stop 7004, 4330 Shawnee Mission Parkway, Fairway, KS 66205, 913-588-8011, 711 TTY (for the Wichita, Salina, and Kansas City, Kansas, medical center campuses).

