Badlands National Park - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Location
Jackson, Pennington, and Oglala Lakota counties, South Dakota, U.S.
Nearestcity
Wall, South Dakota
Coordinates
43°45′00″N 102°30′00″W﻿ / ﻿43.75000°N 102.50000°W﻿ / 43.75000; -102.50000Coordinates: 43°45′00″N 102°30′00″W﻿ / ﻿43.75000°N 102.50000°W﻿ / 43.75000; -102.50000
Area
242,756 acres (379.306sqmi; 98,240ha)[1]
Established
January29,1939(1939-January-29) as a National Monument
November 10, 1978 as a National Park
Visitors
more than 1 million (in2015)[2][3]
Governingbody
National Park Service
Black Hills and Badlands
Sculpture
Mount Rushmore
Crazy Horse
Geologic formations
Badlands
Needles
Devils Tower
Bear Butte
Spearfish Canyon
Mountains
Harney Peak
Caves
Wind Cave
Jewel Cave
Parks, forests, and grassland
Wind Cave
Custer State Park
Black Hills National Forest
Black Elk Wilderness
Buffalo Gap National Grassland
Lakes
Sylvan
Pactola
v
t
e
Badlands National Park (Lakota: Makȟóšiča[4]) is a national park in southwestern South Dakota that protects 242,756 acres (379.306sqmi; 98,240ha)[1] of sharply eroded buttes, pinnacles, and spires blended with the largest undisturbed mixed grass prairie in the United States. The park is managed by the National Park Service.
The Badlands Wilderness protects 64,144 acres (100.225sqmi; 25,958ha) of the park as a designated wilderness area[5] and is the site of the reintroduction of the black-footed ferret, the most endangered land mammal in North America.[6]
The Stronghold Unit is co-managed with the Oglala Lakota tribe and includes sites of 1890s Ghost Dances,[7] a former United States Air Force bomb and gunnery range,[8] and Red Shirt Table, the park's highest point at 3,340 feet (1,020m).[9] Authorized as Badlands National Monument on March 4, 1929, it was not established until January 25, 1939. It was redesignated a national park on November 10, 1978.[10]
Under the Mission 66 plan, the Ben Reifel Visitor Center was constructed for the monument in 1957–58. The park also administers the nearby Minuteman Missile National Historic Site.
Contents
1 Prehistory
1.1 Genera found in the area
2 Human history
2.1 Native Americans
2.2 Fossil hunters
2.3 Homesteaders
2.4 Pine Ridge Indian Reservation
3 Visiting the park
4 Gallery
5 References
6 External links
Prehistory[edit]
Genera found in the area[edit]
Restoration of genera present in the formations, by Jay Matternes
Alligator (Crocodilian)
Archaeotherium (Entelodont)
Dinictis (Nimravid)
Eporeodon (Oreodont)
Eusmilus (Nimravid)
Hoplophoneus (Nimravid)
Hyaenodon (Creodont)
Hyracodon (Running Rhino)
Ischyromys (Ground Squirrel-like Rodent)
Leptomeryx (Tragulid)
Merycoidodon (Oreodont)
Metamynodon (Aquatic Rhino)
Miniochoerus (Oreodont)
Poebrotherium (Camel)
Subhyracodon (Rhinoceros)
For a list of fossil animals discovered in the formations that make up Badlands National Park and surrounding areas, see [[:Category:White River Fauna]].
Human history[edit]
Native Americans[edit]
False-color satellite image of the park (more information)
For 11,000 years, Native Americans have used this area for their hunting grounds. Long before the Lakota were the little-studied paleo-Indians, followed by the Arikara people. Their descendants live today in North Dakota as a part of the Three Affiliated Tribes. Archaeological records combined with oral traditions indicate that these people camped in secluded valleys where fresh water and game were available year round. Eroding out of the stream banks today are the rocks and charcoal of their campfires, as well as the arrowheads and tools they used to butcher bison, rabbits, and other game. From the top of the Badlands Wall, they could scan the area for enemies and wandering herds. If hunting was good, they might hang on into winter, before retracing their way to their villages along the Missouri River. By one hundred and fifty years ago, the Great Sioux Nation consisting of seven bands including the Oglala Lakota, had displaced the other tribes from the northern prairie.
Bison bull in the Park
The next great change came toward the end of the 19th century as homesteaders moved into South Dakota. The U.S. government stripped Native Americans of much of their territory and forced them to live on reservations. In the fall and early winter of 1890, thousands of Native American followers, including many Oglala Sioux, became followers of the Indian prophet Wovoka. His vision called for the native people to dance the Ghost Dance and wear Ghost shirts, which would be impervious to bullets. Wovoka had predicted that the white man would vanish and their hunting grounds would be restored. One of the last known Ghost Dances was conducted on Stronghold Table in the South Unit of Badlands National Park. As winter closed in, the ghost dancers returned to Pine Ridge Agency. The climax of the struggle came in late December, 1890. Headed south from the Cheyenne River, a band of Minneconjou Sioux crossed a pass in the Badlands Wall. Pursued by units of the U.S. Army, they were seeking refuge in the Pine Ridge Reservation. The band, led by [[Chief Spotted Elk[11][bettersourceneeded]]], was finally overtaken by the soldiers near Wounded Knee Creek in the Reservation and ordered to camp there overnight. The troops attempted to disarm Big Foot's band the next morning. Gunfire erupted. Before it was over, nearly three hundred Indians and thirty soldiers lay dead. The Wounded Knee Massacre was the last major clash between Plains Indians and the U.S. military until the advent of the American Indian Movement in the 1970s, most notably in the 1973 standoff at Wounded Knee, South Dakota.
Wounded Knee is not within the boundaries of Badlands National Park. It is located approximately 45 miles (72km) south of the park on Pine Ridge Reservation. The U.S. government and the Oglala Lakota Nation have agreed that this is a story to be told by the Oglala of Pine Ridge and Minneconjou of Standing Rock Reservation. The interpretation of the site and its tragic events are held as the primary responsibility of these survivors.
Fossil hunters[edit]
Aerial view, 3D computer generated image
The history of the White River Badlands as a significant paleontological resource goes back to the traditional Native American knowledge of the area. The Lakota found large fossilized bones, fossilized seashells and turtle shells. They correctly assumed that the area had once been under water, and that the bones belonged to creatures which no longer existed.[citation needed] Paleontological interest in this area began in the 1840s. Trappers and traders regularly traveled the 300 miles (480km) from Fort Pierre to Fort Laramie along a path which skirted the edge of what is now Badlands National Park. Fossils were occasionally collected, and in 1843 a fossilized jaw fragment collected by Alexander Culbertson of the American Fur Company found its way to a physician in St. Louis by the name of Dr. Hiram A. Prout.
In 1846, Prout published a paper about the jaw in the American Journal of Science in which he stated that it had come from a creature he called a Paleotherium. Shortly after the publication, the White River Badlands became popular fossil hunting grounds and, within a couple of decades, numerous new fossil species had been discovered in the White River Badlands. In 1849, Dr. Joseph Leidy published a paper on an Oligocene camel and renamed Prout's Paleotherium, Titanotherium prouti. By 1854 when he published a series of papers about North American fossils, 84 distinct species had been discovered in North America– 77 of which were found in the White River Badlands. In 1870 a Yale professor, O. C. Marsh, visited the region and developed more refined methods of extracting and reassembling fossils into nearly complete skeletons. From 1899 to today, the South Dakota School of Mines has sent people almost every year and remains one of the most active research institutions working in the White River Badlands. Throughout the late 19th century and continuing today, scientists and institutions from all over the world have benefited from the fossil resources of the White River Badlands. The White River Badlands have developed an international reputation as a fossil-rich area. They contain the richest deposits of Oligocene mammals known, providing a brief glimpse of life in this area 33 million years ago.
Homesteaders[edit]
Aspects of American homesteading began before the end of the American Civil War; however, it did not affect the Badlands until the 20th century. Then, many hopeful farmers traveled to South Dakota from Europe or the eastern United States to try to eke out a living in the area. The standard size for a homestead was 160 acres (65ha). Being in a semi-arid, wind-swept environment, this proved far too small of a holding to support a family. In 1916, in the western Dakotas, the size of a homestead was increased to 640 acres (260ha). Cattle grazed the land, and crops such as winter wheat and hay were cut annually. However, the Great Dust Bowl events of the 1930s, combined with waves of grasshoppers, proved too much for most of the settlers of the Badlands. Houses, which had been built out of sod blocks and heated by buffalo chips, were abandoned. Those who remained today ranch and raise wheat.
Pine Ridge Indian Reservation[edit]
Tenting in the Cedar Pass Campground
As part of the World War II effort, the U.S. Army Air Force (USAAF) took possession of 341,726 acres (138,292ha) of land on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation, home of the Oglala Sioux people, for a gunnery range. Included in this range was 337 acres (136ha) from the Badlands National Monument. This land was used extensively from 1942 through 1945 as an air-to-air and air-to-ground gunnery range including both precision and demolition bombing exercises. After the war, portions of the bombing range were used as an artillery range by the South Dakota National Guard. In 1968, most of the range was declared excess property by the USAF though 2,500 acres (1,000ha) are retained by the USAF but no longer used, the majority of the land was turned over to the National Park Service.
Firing took place within most of the present day Stronghold District. Land was bought or leased from individual landowners and the Tribe in order to clear the area of human occupation. Old car bodies and 55 gallon drums painted bright yellow were used as targets. Bulls-eyes 250 feet (76m) across were plowed into the ground and used as targets by bombardiers. Small automatic aircraft called "target drones" and 60-by-8-foot (18 by 2m) screens dragged behind planes served as mobile targets. Today, the ground is littered with discarded bullet cases and unexploded ordnance.
In the 1940s, 125 families were forcibly relocated from their farms and ranches, including Dewey Beard, a survivor of the Wounded Knee Massacre. Those that remained nearby recall times when they had to dive under tractors while out cutting hay to avoid bombs dropped by planes miles outside of the boundary. In the town of Interior, both a church and the building housing the current post office were struck by six inch (152mm) shells through the roof. Pilots operating out of Ellsworth Air Force Base near Rapid City found it a real challenge to determine the exact boundaries of the range. Fortunately, there were no civilian casualties. However, at least a dozen flight crew personnel lost their lives in plane crashes.
The Stronghold District of Badlands National Park offers more than scenic badlands with spectacular views. Co-managed by the National Park Service and the Oglala Lakota Tribe, this 133,300-acre (53,900ha) area is steeped in history. Deep draws, high tables and rolling prairie hold the stories of the earliest plains hunters, the paleo-Indians, as well as the present day Lakota Nation.
Visiting the park[edit]
This section requires expansion. (December 2015)
Badlands National Park has two campgrounds for overnight visits.[12] The Ben Reifel Visitor Center within the park offers a bookstore, special programs, and exhibits. More than a quarter-million people visited the Ben Reifel Visitor Center in 2015.[2]
Gallery[edit]
Trails
Cliff Shelf Nature Trail Boardwalk through the Cedar (Juniper) Forest.
Door Trail boardwalk 'Chadron Formation' is the surface (34-37 MYA) Eocene
The ladder on the Notch trail
Boardwalk to the Windows
Overlooks
Big Badlands overlook peaks above the upper grasslands.
Changing Scenes Overlook
Prairie Wind Overlook in the Badlands of South Dakota. This is a boardwalk through the prairie grass to an information sign.
References[edit]
^ a b "Listing of acreage as of December 31, 2011". Land Resource Division, National Park Service. Retrieved March 5, 2012.
^ a b Raposa, Megan (February 4, 2016). "Badlands park exceeds one million visitors in 2015". Argus Leader. Retrieved February 4, 2016.
^ "NPS Annual Recreation Visits Report". National Park Service. Retrieved June 3, 2015.
^ Ullrich, Jan, ed. (2011). New Lakota Dictionary (2nd ed.). Bloomington, IN: Lakota Language Consortium. p.855. ISBN978-0-9761082-9-0. LCCN2008922508.
^ "Badlands Wilderness". Wilderness.net. Retrieved March 5, 2012.
^ "2008 Badlands Visitor Guide" (PDF). National Park Service. p.2. Retrieved March 12, 2011.
^ "Badlands National Park". Rand McNally. Archived from the original on February 25, 2011. Retrieved March 12, 2011. The cultural centerpiece of this section is the Stronghold Table, where the Oglala Sioux danced the Ghost Dance for the last time in 1890.
^ "Pine Ridge Gunnery Range/Badlands Bombing Range". South Dakota; Department of Environment &amp; Natural Resources. Archived from the original on March 9, 2011. Retrieved March 12, 2011.
^ "U.S. National Park High Points". Peakbagger.com. Retrieved March 17, 2008.
^ "The National Parks: Index 2009–2011". National Park Service. Retrieved March 5, 2012.
^ Wounded Knee Massacre
^ http://www.nps.gov/badl/planyourvisit/camping.htm
External links[edit]
Find more about
Badlands National Park
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from Commons
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Badlands National Park - official National Park Service website
Badlands Visitor Information website
Badlands Bombing Range - U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
v
t
e
National parks of the United States
Acadia
American Samoa
Arches
Badlands
Big Bend
Biscayne
Black Canyon of the Gunnison
Bryce Canyon
Canyonlands
Capitol Reef
Carlsbad Caverns
Channel Islands
Congaree
Crater Lake
Cuyahoga Valley
Death Valley
Denali
Dry Tortugas
Everglades
Gates of the Arctic
Glacier
Glacier Bay
Grand Canyon
Grand Teton
Great Basin
Great Sand Dunes
Great Smoky Mountains
Guadalupe Mountains
Haleakalā
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes
Hot Springs
Isle Royale
Joshua Tree
Katmai
Kenai Fjords
Kings Canyon
Kobuk Valley
Lake Clark
Lassen Volcanic
Mammoth Cave
Mesa Verde
Mount Rainier
North Cascades
Olympic
Petrified Forest
Pinnacles
Redwood
Rocky Mountain
Saguaro
Sequoia
Shenandoah
Theodore Roosevelt
Virgin Islands
Voyageurs
Wind Cave
Wrangell–St. Elias
Yellowstone
Yosemite
Zion
List of national parks of the United States (by elevation)
v
t
e
Protected areas of South Dakota
Federal
National Parks
Badlands
Wind Cave
National Historic Sites
and Memorials
Minuteman Missile NHS
Mount Rushmore NMem
National Monument
Jewel Cave
National Forests
Black Hills
Custer
National Grasslands
Buffalo Gap
Dakota Prairie
Fort Pierre
Grand River
National Historic Trail
Lewis and Clark
National Recreational River
Missouri
National Wildlife Refuges
Huron WMD
Karl E. Mundt
Lacreek
Lake Andes
Madison WMD
Sand Lake
Sand Lake WMD
Waubay
Waubay WMD
National Wilderness Areas
Badlands
Black Elk
State
State Parks
Adams Homestead and Nature Preserve
Bear Butte
Custer
Fisher Grove
Fort Sisseton
Good Earth
Hartford Beach
Lake Herman
Newton Hills
Oakwood Lakes
Palisades
Roy Lake
Sica Hollow
Union Grove
State Recreation Areas
Angostura
Beaver Creek
Big Sioux
Big Stone Island
Burke Lake
Buryanek
Chief White Crane
Cow Creek
Farm Island
George S. Mickelson Trail
Indian Creek
LaFramboise Island
Lake Alvin
Lake Cochrane
Lake Hiddenwood
Lake Louise
Lake Poinsett
Lake Thompson
Lake Vermillion
Lewis and Clark
Little Moreau
Llewellyn Johns
Mina Lake
North Point
North Wheeler
Oahe Downstream
Okobojo Point
Pease Creek
Pelican Lake
Pickerel Lake
Pierson Ranch
Platte Creek
Randall Creek
Richmond Lake
Sandy Shore
Shadehill
Snake Creek
Spirit Mound Historic Prairie
Springfield
Swan Creek
Walker's Point
West Bend
West Pollack
West Whitlock
v
t
e
State of South Dakota
Pierre (capital)
Topics
Delegations
Famous South Dakotans
Geography
Government
History
Timeline
Transportation
Symbols
Universities
Visitor attractions
Society
Culture
Crime
Demographics
Economy
Education
Politics
Regions
Badlands
Black Hills
Coteau des Prairies
Coteau du Missouri
Dissected Till Plains
Drift Prairie
East River
Pine Ridge
Siouxland
West River
Larger cities
pop. over 5,000
Aberdeen
Belle Fourche
Box Elder
Brandon
Brookings
Harrisburg
Huron
Madison
Mitchell
Pierre
Rapid City
Sioux Falls
Spearfish
Sturgis
Vermillion
Watertown
Yankton
Smaller cities
pop. 1,000 - 5,000
Baltic
Beresford
Britton
Canton
Chamberlain
Clark
Clear Lake
Crooks
Custer
De Smet
Deadwood
Dell Rapids
Eagle Butte
Elk Point
Flandreau
Fort Pierre
Freeman
Garretson
Gettysburg
Gregory
Groton
Hartford
Hot Springs
Lead
Lemmon
Lennox
Martin
Milbank
Miller
Mission
Mobridge
North Sioux City
Parker
Parkston
Platte
Redfield
Salem
Sisseton
Springfield
Summerset
Tea
Tyndall
Volga
Wagner
Webster
Winner
Largest CDPs
pop. over 1,000
Blackhawk
Colonial Pine Hills
Dakota Dunes
Fort Thompson
North Eagle Butte
North Spearfish
Oglala
Pine Ridge
Porcupine
Rapid Valley
Rosebud
Counties
Aurora
Beadle
Bennett
Bon Homme
Brookings
Brown
Brule
Buffalo
Butte
Campbell
Charles Mix
Clark
Clay
Codington
Corson
Custer
Davison
Day
Deuel
Dewey
Douglas
Edmunds
Fall River
Faulk
Grant
Gregory
Haakon
Hamlin
Hand
Hanson
Harding
Hughes
Hutchinson
Hyde
Jackson
Jerauld
Jones
Kingsbury
Lake
Lawrence
Lincoln
Lyman
Marshall
McCook
McPherson
Meade
Mellette
Miner
Minnehaha
Moody
Oglala Lakota
Pennington
Perkins
Potter
Roberts
Sanborn
Spink
Stanley
Sully
Todd
Tripp
Turner
Union
Walworth
Yankton
Ziebach
Authority control
VIAF: 207073253
GND: 4460751-9
SUDOC: 082988676
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Badlands_National_Park&amp;oldid=703308213"					
				Categories: IUCN Category IIBadlands National ParkBadlandsNational parks in South DakotaArchaeological sites in South DakotaOligocene mammalsProtected areas of Jackson County, South DakotaProtected areas of Pennington County, South DakotaProtected areas of Oglala Lakota County, South DakotaProtected areas established in 19391939 establishments in South DakotaPaleontology in South DakotaHidden categories: Use mdy dates from June 2012Coordinates on WikidataArticles containing Lakota-language textAll articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from October 2015All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from April 2014Articles to be expanded from December 2015All articles to be expandedWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
			Navigation menu
						Personal tools
							Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in						
						Namespaces
															Article
															Talk
							Variants
						Views
															Read
															Edit
															View history
						More
							Search
			Navigation
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
			Interaction
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
			Tools
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
			Print/export
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
			Languages
						العربيةБългарскиCatalàDanskDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançaisHrvatskiItalianoLietuviųNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålPolskiPortuguêsRomânăRuna SimiРусскийShqipSuomiSvenskaTürkçe中文					
				Edit links			
											 This page was last modified on 4 February 2016, at 19:00.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Mobile view
											Developers
											Cookie statement

