      Faculty Recognition | Foundation Professors
            People Search
        Degree Search
Browse by school    
        Course Search
Search class sections | Online courses
        Library Search
Libraries | Hours &amp; locations | Ask
    Advising | Catalog | Tutors
    Writing Center | Math help room
    Finals Schedule | GPA Calculator
          CMS Login: KU Users | Non-KU Users
    KU Home
    About KU
    Admissions
    Athletics
    Alumni
    Campuses
    Social Media
    Endowment
    KU Today
                                Foundation Professors
                                        Make discoveries that change the world. Here.
      Search form
  Search 
      Home
Foundation Distinguished ProfessorsK. Christopher Beard
William Picking
David Roediger
Bold Aspirations Visitor and Lecture Series &raquo;
      MenuHome
Foundation Distinguished ProfessorsK. Christopher Beard
William Picking
David Roediger
Bold Aspirations Visitor and Lecture Series &raquo;
Search
      Search form
  Search 
Meet KU's Foundation Distinguished Professors
            Chris Beard
        Digging up a one-of-a-kind find: Foundation ProfessorHarnessing Information, Multiplying KnowledgeChris BeardFrom Dawson Chair at the Carnegie Museum, one of the nation’s top-five natural history museums, to KU Foundation Professor, Chris Beard has made his mark in paleontology. Renowned for discoveries of new primate groups that reshaped theories, Beard joins KU&#039;s proud history in the field.Read the story &raquo;    
            William Picking
        Molecules of prevention, a world of curePromoting Well-Being, Finding CuresWilliam PickingWhen it was time to expand KU’s vaccine research, we turned to William Picking, one of the nation’s foremost experts. Among his first goals is taking potential vaccines for shigella, salmonella, and yersina from the lab to clinical trials to life-saving applications throughout the world.Read the story &raquo;    
            David Roediger
        KU&#039;s first Foundation Professor has a bright history aheadBuilding Communities, Expanding OpportunitiesDavid RoedigerAward-winning author David Roediger&#039;s focus on race, ethnicity, and labor, and groundbreaking work on the study of race have transformed the field. His commitment to multidisciplinary research and teaching make him an ideal addition to our outstanding departments of American Studies and History.Read the story &raquo;    
            James Bever
        Breaking down earth&#039;s secrets by breaking down earthSustaining the Planet, Powering the WorldJames BeverPeers call his lab among the most exciting in the world, where James Bever has mastered the study of soil microbes and been generous in sharing his techniques. His passion for multidisciplinary work will enliven the Kansas prairie with research on climate change, agriculture, and human health.Read the story &raquo;    
            Beth Bailey
        Sex, gender, race: a military expert who rethinks all threeBuilding Communities, Expanding OpportunitiesBeth BaileyBeth Bailey&#039;s books - 5 in all since 1988 - place her at the vanguard of New Military History and the study of 20th century sexuality. At KU, she&#039;ll join military experts like Adrian Lewis and Jennifer Weber and one of the oldest women&#039;s studies programs in the US.Read the story &raquo;    
            Victor Agadjanian
        Beyond the numbers, demographer shines a light on migrationPromoting Well-Being, Finding CuresVictor AgadjanianVictor Agadjanian examines health issues, such as reproduction and HIV/AIDS, not for cures but for trends and solutions. At KU, he&#039;ll join the growing Migration, Immigration, Diaspora, and Human Trafficking faculty cluster and co-lead a new research center for migration and immigration studies.Read the story &raquo;    
            Cecilia Menjivar
        Examining the social worlds of those living with violenceBuilding Communities, Expanding OpportunitiesCecilia MenjivarOne of the most eminent and productive scholars in the field of Central American and immigrant studies, Dr. Menjivar will be invaluable to KU&#039;s growing Anti-Slavery and Human Trafficking Initiative. She will co-lead a center dedicated to the subject with Victor Agadjanian.Read the story &raquo;    
            Dennis O&#039;Rourke
        CSI: Ancient - Tracking early humans via moleculesHarnessing Information, Multiplying KnowledgeDennis O&#039;RourkeOne of the world&#039;s top biological anthropologists, Dennis O&#039;Rourke tracks migration and the history of disease working at the forefront of the study of ancient DNA, metric traits like dental records, and genetic markers of the blood recovered from archaeological remains. Read the story &raquo;    
            Christophe Royon
        Accelerating discovery: Physicist captures moments in time and spaceHarnessing Information, Multiplying KnowledgeChristophe RoyonFinding and characterizing the tiniest particles in the universe requires special skills, like those of world-class physicist Christophe Royon. His expertise in the detection of shattered subatomic particles will foster novel interdisciplinary and collaborative research at KU that has potential to open new worlds of discovery.
Read the story &raquo;    
            Yong Zhao
        Educational leadership scholar sets stage for growthBuilding Communities, Expanding OpportunitiesYong ZhaoAcclaimed scholar Yong Zhao is an influential thought leader in education reforms, technology shifts, globalization and more.  His expertise is driving concepts in educational excellence around the world.  Dr. Zhao’s work also includes creativity and entrepreneurship education, education in China, and Chinese-language learning.Read the story &raquo;    
            Steven Soper
        Devising nano-tests that deliver life-changing resultsPromoting Well-Being, Finding CuresSteven SoperLeading-edge interdisciplinary research have refined the point of detection for cancer and other disease markers.  Eminent scholar Steven Soper, a bioanalytical chemist and biomedical engineer, develops innovative methods for isolating circulating tumor cells and nanoscale devices for next-generation sequencing.Read the story &raquo;    
            Mark Shiflett
        Green light: Expert engineers environmental solutions Sustaining the Planet, Powering the WorldMark ShiflettChemical engineer Mark Shiflett knows saving the world doesn’t require superhero powers, just a good idea and the expertise to see it through.  As a green chemistry researcher for DuPont, Shiflett helped create a top commercial refrigerant that is safe for the Earth’s ozone layer.Read the story &raquo;    
MAKE DISCOVERIES THAT CHANGE THE WORLD. HERE.
	Finding Cures
	Sustaining the Planet,
	Powering the World
	Building Communities,
	Expanding Opportunities
	Harnessing Information,
	Multiplying Knowledge
Because a healthy society is critical to our world's future, KU promotes wellness locally and across the globe through varied research projects. These span many disciplines, including pharmaceutical science and neurological studies, age-related health needs, speech and language, cancer therapies, and more.
The University of Kansas has specific goals as we search for faculty:
We may hire under joint appointments or outside traditional department structure, such as research centers
	We are willing to support economic and entrepreneurial endeavors
	We are looking for staff who bridge historically separate disciplines
	We may cluster our hires in areas new to KU (e.g. epigenetics)
The institute, whose director is Susan M. Lunte, the Ralph N. Adams Distinguished Professor of Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Chemistry, develops enabling technologies necessary for expanding the capabilities of high throughput screening, whole cell assays for drug discovery, and new approaches for the study and early detection of diseases including cancer, stroke, AIDS and neurodegenerative diseases.
KU is determined to take an active role in creating a sustainable environment and making affordable energy more available. As we strive to be good stewards of our environment, we are working on both the global and local level on advances that will promote economic growth, create new sources of energy, conserve resources, and more.
Specifically, the University of Kansas is interested in:
Climate scientists
	Social scientists and environmental scientists studying impacts of climate change on economic systems and landscape dynamics
	Alternative power and transportation scientists with a multidisciplinary focus, as well as senior managers employed by the U.S. Department of Energy multi-purpose national laboratories
University Distinguished Professor of Sociology 
	Director, NSF program in interdisciplinary climate change studies and of the Center for Research on Global Change
Dan Rockhill
 
J.L. Constant Distinguished Professor of Architecture.
	Founder, Studio 804, award-winning design/build program for architecture graduate students. 
Bala Subramaniam
 
Dan F. Servey Distinguished Professor of Chemical &amp; Petroleum Engineering Director, Center for Environmentally Beneficial Catalysis
Judy Wu
University Distinguished Professor of Physics &amp; Astronomy
	Directs the Nanotechnology Project and Thin Film Research Group
Biodiversity Institute
 
The paleontology collections are part of a $600,000 NSF effort to digitize thousands of fossils housed at the KU institute. Information about the fossils' temporal and geographic distribution in deep time will be shared with other institutions to complete a fossil record that will more accurately show how climate change could impact species on Earth going forward.
CReSIS
 
KU's remote sensing research program, CReSIS (Center for Remote Sensing of Ice Sheets) builds on a 50-year-old tradition that began with a NASA program at KU in the early 1960s.
Feedstock to Tailpipe
 
 
This Transportation Research Institute's initiative began as a student-driven effort to clean up tailpipe emissions from outdated campus buses by utilizing waste cooking oil to convert to biodiesel.
Studio 804
 
This design/build program for architecture graduate students has won national awards for its LEED Platinum projects. Its mission is continued research and development of sustainable, affordable, and inventive building solutions.
In an effort to build stronger communities that provide better opportunities to everyone, KU strives to identify obstacles to human rights and development and to find sustainable solutions to these problems. Already, we are researching migration patterns to be better informed of the dynamics behind the development of civic communities. We are studying the economic, educational, social, public health, and developmental problems facing America's children. We are focusing on ways to strengthen our cities and build stronger leaders.
As a part of this effort, KU is searching for research faculty, particularly as we create a Joint Center on Inequality and Social Justice.
Director, Center for Science Technology &amp; Economic Policy
MaryEmma Graham
 
University Distinguished Professor of English
	Founder/director of Project on the History of Black Writing; founder, Langston Hughes National Poetry Project
Beach Center on Disability
The center, led by the Ross &amp; Mariana Beach Distinguished Professors Ann and Rud Turnbull, seeks to make a significant and sustainable difference in the quality of life of families and individuals affected by disability.
Institute for Policy &amp; Social Research
The institute's affiliated faculty represents such disciplines as economics, environmental studies, geography, political science, social welfare, and sociology.
Juniper Gardens Children's Project
Since 1964, the Juniper Gardens Children's Project has grown from humble beginnings into an internationally recognized research center on child development in low-income communities.
Innovation in an array of areas is critical to our future, which is why KU is dedicated to harnessing information in ways that will positively affect individuals' health and well-being while also protecting their privacy and security. Today, KU research is helping create advances in digital technology, nanotechnology, infrastructure, and more.
Our goal is to push our research even further by hiring faculty who:
Are highly experienced in scientific computing; handling and processing massive data; and scientific visualization
	Will allow us to expand upon our existing expertise for information privacy, social media, and ethics
	Have a well-rounded expertise of all avenues of information technologies
The paleontology collections are part of a $600,000 NSF effort to digitize thousands of fossils housed at the KU institute. Information about the fossils' temporal and geographic distribution in deep time will be shared with other institutions to complete a fossil record that will more accurately show how climate change could impact species on Earth going forward.
ITTC
The Information and Telecommunication Technology Center advances knowledge and creates innovative technologies in telecommunications, information systems, bioinformatics, and radar. ITTC researchers are helping shape not only national policy but also the technology leaders of tomorrow.
Large Hadron Collider
A five-year, $2.5 million National Science Foundation award allows students and faculty from the University of Kansas to help to monitor crashes between subatomic particles in order to create conditions that existed during the fraction of a nanosecond after the "Big Bang" that created the universe.
ScholarWorks
KU ScholarWorks, a digital repository for scholarly work created by faculty and staff at the University of Kansas, provides long-term preservation for your materials by managing backups, and ensuring that your work remains accessible at a stable location. By faculty request and consent, KU became the first public university to adopt an open-access policy.
              In the news
  David Roediger named first Foundation Professor &raquo;
  Curator at Carnegie Museum of Natural History joins KU as Foundation Distinguished Professor &raquo;
  Renowned expert in infectious diseases returns to KU as newest Foundation Professor &raquo;
            Why KU
                                    Apply &raquo;
                                            One of 34 U.S. public institutions in the prestigious Association of American Universities
                                            26 prestigious Rhodes Scholars &mdash; more than all other Kansas colleges combined
                                            Nearly $290 million in financial aid annually
                                            44 nationally ranked graduate programs.
&mdash;U.S. News &amp; World Report
                                            Top 50 nationwide for size of library collection.
&mdash;ALA
                                            23rd nationwide for service to veterans
&mdash;"Best for Vets," Military Times
    KU Today
        Give to KU &raquo;
      Contact Foundation Professors
                    provost@ku.edu
                            785-864-4904
        1450 Jayhawk Blvd. 
Room 250 
Lawrence, KS 66045    
    Academics
    Admissions
    Alumni
    Athletics
    Campuses
    Giving
    Jobs
      Contact KU
Lawrence, KS | Maps    
    The University of Kansas prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, ethnicity, religion, sex, national origin, age, ancestry, disability, status as a veteran, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, gender identity, gender expression, and genetic information in the university’s programs and activities. Retaliation is also prohibited by university policy. The following persons have been designated to handle inquiries regarding the nondiscrimination policies and are the Title IX coordinators for their respective campuses: Executive Director of the Office of Institutional Opportunity & Access, IOA@ku.edu, 1246 West Campus Road, Room 153A, Lawrence, KS 66045, 785-864-6414, 711 TTY (for the Lawrence, Edwards, Parsons, Yoder, and Topeka campuses); Director, Equal Opportunity Office, Mail Stop 7004, 4330 Shawnee Mission Parkway, Fairway, KS 66205, 913-588-8011, 711 TTY (for the Wichita, Salina, and Kansas City, Kansas, medical center campuses).

