Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Gates of the Arctic from the air
Location
Coldfoot, Alaska
Coordinates
67°47′0″N 153°18′0″W﻿ / ﻿67.78333°N 153.30000°W﻿ / 67.78333; -153.30000Coordinates: 67°47′0″N 153°18′0″W﻿ / ﻿67.78333°N 153.30000°W﻿ / 67.78333; -153.30000
Area
8,472,506 acres (3,428,702ha)[1]
Established
December 2, 1980
Visitors
12,669 (in2014)[2]
Governingbody
National Park Service
Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve is a U.S. National Park in Alaska. It is the northernmost national park in the U.S. (the entirety of the park lies north of the Arctic Circle) and the second largest at 8,472,506 acres (3,428,702ha), slightly larger in area than Belgium. The park consists primarily of portions of the Brooks Range of mountains. It was first protected as a U.S. National Monument on December 1, 1978, before becoming a national park and preserve two years later in 1980 upon passage of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act. A large part of the park is protected in the Gates of the Arctic Wilderness which covers 7,167,192 acres (2,900,460ha).[3] The wilderness area adjoins the Noatak Wilderness Area and together they form the largest contiguous wilderness in the United States.
Contents
1 Activities
2 Geography
2.1 Geology
3 Ecology
4 History
5 References
6 Bibliography
7 External links
Activities[edit]
Hikers in the Itkillik River drainage, a group of tilted sedimentary peaks in the central Brooks Range
There are no roads in Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve. Owing to its remoteness and lack of supportive infrastructure, the park is one of the less visited in the U.S. National Park system, welcoming just 11,012 visitors in 2013; by comparison, Grand Canyon National Park received more than 4.5 million visitors (more than 400 times as many people) in the same year.[4]
Camping is permitted throughout the park, but may be restricted by easements when crossing Native Corporation lands within the park.
The park headquarters is in Fairbanks.[5][6] Park Service operations in the park are managed from the Bettles Ranger Station, to the south of the park.
Geography[edit]
Map of Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve Also see resolution adjustable pdf map
Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve lies to the west of the Dalton Highway, centered on the Brooks Range and covering the north and south slopes of the mountains. The park includes the Endicott Mountains and part of the Schwatka Mountains. The majority of Gates of the Arctic is designated as national park, in which only subsistence hunting by local rural residents is permitted. Sport hunting is only permitted in the national preserve. To hunt and trap in the preserve, a person must have all required licenses and permits and follow all other state regulations.[7]
The eastern boundary of the park generally follows the Dalton Highway at a distance of a few miles, with the westernmost part of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge 10 miles (16km) farther east. Kanuti National Wildlife Refuge is near the park's southeast boundary. Noatak National Preserve adjoins the western boundary, and the National Petroleum Reserve–Alaska adjoins the northwest corner of the park. Almost all of the park is designated as wilderness, with the exception of areas around Anaktuvuk Pass. A detached portion of the park surrounds the outlying Fortress Mountain and Castle Mountain to the north of the park.[8]
Ten small communities outside the park's boundaries are classified as "resident zone communities" and depend on park resources for food and livelihood. They are Alatna, Allakaket, Ambler, Anaktuvuk Pass, Bettles/Evansville, Hughes, Kobuk, Nuiqsut, Shungnak, and Wiseman.[9] There are no established roads, trails, visitor facilities, or campgrounds in the park. The Dalton Highway (Alaska State Highway 11) comes within five miles (8km) of the park's eastern boundary, but requires a river crossing to reach the park from the road.[6] The Arctic Interagency Visitor Center in nearby Coldfoot is open from late May to early September, providing information on the parks, preserves and refuges of the Brooks Range, Yukon Valley and the North Slope.[10] About 259,000 acres (105,000ha) of the park and preserve are owned by native corporations or the State of Alaska. 7,263,000 acres (2,939,000ha) are protected in the Gates of the Arctic Wilderness.[11]
The park contains mountains such as the Arrigetch Peaks and Mount Igikpak. The park also features six Wild and Scenic Rivers:
Alatna River 83 miles (134km)
John River 52 miles (84km)
Kobuk River 110 miles (177km)
the North Fork of the Koyukuk River 102 miles (164km)
part of the Noatak River
Tinayguk River 44 miles (71km)
Geology[edit]
The Arrigetch Peaks
Ancient seabed underlies much of Gates of the Arctic National Park. In some places throughout the park weathering has formed cliffs, fins, arches, and other formations.
The park includes much of the central and eastern Brooks Range. It extends to the east as far as the Middle Fork of the Koyukuk River, which is paralleled by the Dalton Highway and the Trans-Alaska Pipeline. The park straddles the continental divide, separating the drainages of the Pacific and Arctic Oceans. The northernmost section of the park includes small portions of the Arctic foothills tundra. The Brooks Range occupies the central section of the park, running on an east-west line. To the south of the Brooks Range the Ambler-Chandalar Ridge, with associated valleys and lakes, runs east-west. The southernmost portion of the park includes the Kobuk-Selawik Lowlands, with the headwaters of the Kobuk River. The Brooks Range has seen repeated glaciation, with the most recent called the Itkillik glaciation from about 24,000 years ago to roughly 1500 to 1200 years before the present.[11]
Ecology[edit]
The boreal forest extends to about 68 degrees north latitude, characterized by black and white spruce mixed with poplar. To the north of that line, which coincides with the spine of the Brooks Range, lies cold-arid land that has been described as "Arctic desert." During the long winters temperatures can reach −75°F (−59°C), but can reach 90°F (32°C) for a short time in summer. The park lies above the Arctic circle.[11]
Fauna include foxes, black bears, cougars, Dall sheep, marmots, snowshoe hares, muskoxen, moose, brown bears, coyotes, Canadian lynxes, polar bears, muskrats, river otters, beavers, and gray wolves. Caribou are common in the park, and one of Alaska's best known populations, the Porcupine herd, may spend some time in the park. Caribou are important as a food source to native peoples.[12] The park is also the northernmost range limit for the Dall sheep.[13] Grizzly bears are also present in the park and preserve. There are about 132 brown bears in the park and preserve, based on a density of about one bear per 100 square miles.[14]
History[edit]
Nomadic peoples have inhabited the Brooks Range for as many as 12,500 years, living mainly on caribou and other wildlife. The Mesa site at Iteriak Creek has yielded evidence of occupation between 11,500 and 10,300 years before the present. Later sites from around 6,000 years before present have yielded projectile points, stone knives and net sinkers. The Arctic small tool tradition (ASTt) of about 4,500 BP has also been documented.A late phase of the ASTt from between 2500 and 950 BP, the Ipuitak phase, has been documented in the park at the Bateman Site at Itkillik Lake.[11]
The earliest Inupiat people appeared about 1200 AD at the coast and spread to the Brooks Range, becoming the Nunamiut.[11] The Nunamiut people, who had returned to their traditional homelands following a crash in the caribou populations in the early 1900s, were still living a relatively isolated subsistence way of life into the late 1940s. In 1949 the last two bands came together in the valley of the Anaktuvuk River, and over the next decade established the community of Anaktuvuk Pass.[15] The Gwich'in people, a Northern Athabaskan group also lived in the area in the last 1000 years, moving south of the park in historic times.[11]
The Alaskan interior was not explored until the late 19th century, shortly before discovery of gold in the Klondike brought prospectors to Alaska. Some encampments of explorers and survey parties have been identified in the park. A few small mining operations were established in the early 20th century, never amounting to much.[11]
The park's name dates to 1929, when wilderness activist Bob Marshall, exploring the North Fork of the Koyukuk River, encountered a pair of mountains (Frigid Crags and Boreal Mountain), one on each side of the river. He christened this portal the "Gates of the Arctic." Marshall spent time in Wiseman during the early 1930s, publishing an account of the place in his 1933 book Arctic Village. In the 1940s writer and researcher Olaus Murie proposed that Alaskan lands be preserved.[16]
Proposals for a national park in the Brooks Range first emerged in the 1960s, and in 1968 a National Park Service survey team recommended the establishment of a 4,100,000-acre (1,700,000ha) park in the area.[15] That year, Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall recommended to President Lyndon B. Johnson that Johnson use the Antiquities Act to proclaim a national monument in the Brooks Range and other Alaskan locations, but Johnson declined. During the 1970s the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) prompted serious examination of the disposition of lands held by the federal government. A series of bills were considered to deal with conservation land proposals authorized under ANCSA, but the legislation that would become the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA) was held up in Congress in the late 1970s. Consequently, on December 1, 1978 President Jimmy Carter used the Antiquities Act to proclaim much of the proposed new Alaskan parklands as national monuments, including Gates of the Arctic National Monument. In 1980 Congress passed ANILCA, and the monument became Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve on December 2, 1980.[16]
References[edit]
^ "Listing of acreage as of December 31, 2011". Land Resource Division, National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-06.
^ "NPS Annual Recreation Visits Report". National Park Service. Retrieved 2015-06-28.
^ "Gates of the Arctic Wilderness". Wilderness.net. Retrieved 2012-03-06.
^ "Annual Park Ranking Report for Recreation Visitors in: 2013". NPS Stats. Retrieved 25 August 2014.
^ "Contact Us". Gates of the Arctic National Park &amp; Preserve. National Park Service. Retrieved 20 February 2013.
^ a b "Directions". Gates of the Arctic National Park &amp; Preserve. National Park Service. Retrieved 20 February 2013.
^ "Hunting - Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve". National Park Service. Retrieved 20 February 2013.
^ "Gates of the Arctic Map" (PDF). Gates of the Arctic National Park &amp; Preserve. National Park Service. Retrieved 20 February 2013.
^ "Title 36: Parks, Forests, and Public Property". GPO Access. Retrieved 2012-03-06.
^ "Arctic Interagency Visitor Center". Bureau of Land Management. Retrieved 20 February 2013.
^ a b c d e f g "Gate of the Arctic National Park and Preserve". National Park Service. Retrieved 22 February 2013.
^ "Caribou". National Park Service. Retrieved November 2, 2014.
^ "Dall's Sheep". National Park Service. Retrieved November 2, 2014.
^ "Brown Bears". National Park Service. Retrieved November 2, 2014.
^ a b "An Anaktuvuk Pass History". Gates of the Arctic National Park &amp; Preserve. National Park Service. Retrieved 20 February 2013.
^ a b "Creation of Gates of the Arctic National Park &amp; Preserve". Gates of the Arctic National Park &amp; Preserve. National Park Service.
Bibliography[edit]
Marshall, Robert (1956), Alaska Wilderness, George Marshall ed., (2005 reprint), University of California Press ISBN 0-520-24498-2
Marshall, Robert (1933), Arctic Village. H. Smith and R. Haas, New York.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve.
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Gates of the Arctic National Park.
Gates Of The Arctic National Park and Preserve National Park Service site
Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve at the National Park Service Alaska Regional Office
v
t
e
National parks of the United States
Acadia
American Samoa
Arches
Badlands
Big Bend
Biscayne
Black Canyon of the Gunnison
Bryce Canyon
Canyonlands
Capitol Reef
Carlsbad Caverns
Channel Islands
Congaree
Crater Lake
Cuyahoga Valley
Death Valley
Denali
Dry Tortugas
Everglades
Gates of the Arctic
Glacier
Glacier Bay
Grand Canyon
Grand Teton
Great Basin
Great Sand Dunes
Great Smoky Mountains
Guadalupe Mountains
Haleakalā
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes
Hot Springs
Isle Royale
Joshua Tree
Katmai
Kenai Fjords
Kings Canyon
Kobuk Valley
Lake Clark
Lassen Volcanic
Mammoth Cave
Mesa Verde
Mount Rainier
North Cascades
Olympic
Petrified Forest
Pinnacles
Redwood
Rocky Mountain
Saguaro
Sequoia
Shenandoah
Theodore Roosevelt
Virgin Islands
Voyageurs
Wind Cave
Wrangell–St. Elias
Yellowstone
Yosemite
Zion
List of national parks of the United States (by elevation)
v
t
e
National Preserves of the United States
Aniakchak
Bering Land Bridge
Big Cypress
Big Thicket
Craters of the Moon
Denali
Gates of the Arctic
Glacier Bay
Great Sand Dunes
Katmai
Lake Clark
Little River Canyon
Mojave
Noatak
Tallgrass Prairie
Timucuan
Yukon-Charley Rivers
Wrangell-St. Elias
v
t
e
Protected areas of Alaska
Federal
National Parks
Denali
Gates of the Arctic
Glacier Bay
Katmai
Kenai Fjords
Kobuk Valley
Lake Clark
Wrangell–St. Elias
National Historical Parks
Klondike Gold Rush
Sitka
National Monuments
Admiralty Island (USFS)
Aniakchak
Cape Krusenstern
Misty Fiords (USFS)
World War II Valor in the Pacific
National Preserves
Bering Land Bridge
Noatak
Yukon–Charley Rivers
National Wildlife Refuges
Alaska Maritime
Alaska Peninsula
Arctic
Becharof
Innoko
Izembek
Kanuti
Kenai
Kodiak
Koyukuk
Nowitna
Saint Lazaria
Selawik
Tetlin
Togiak
Yukon Delta
Yukon Flats
National Forests
Chugach
Tongass
Forest Service units
Mendenhall Glacier
U.S. Wilderness Areas
Aleutian Islands
Andreafsky
Becharof
Bering Sea
Bogoslof
Chamisso
Chuck River
Coronation Island
Denali
Endicott River
Forrester Island
Gates of the Arctic
Glacier Bay
Hazy Islands
Innoko
Izembek
Karta River
Katmai
Kenai
Kobuk Valley
Kootznoowoo
Koyukuk
Kuiu
Lake Clark
Maurille Islands
Misty Fjords
Mollie Beattie
Noatak
Nunivak
Petersburg Creek–Duncan Salt Chuck
Pleasant/Lemusurier/Inian Islands
Russell Fjord
Saint Lazaria
Selawik
Semidi
Simeonof
South Baranof
South Etolin
South Prince of Wales
Stikine-LeConte
Tebenkof Bay
Togiak
Tracy Arm-Fords Terror
Tuxedni
Unimak
Warren Island
West Chichagof-Yakobi
Wrangell–Saint Elias
National Conservation Area
Steese
State
State Parks
Afognak Island
Alaska Chilkat Bald Eagle
Baranof Castle Hill
Birch Lake
Chena River Area
Chena River Site
Chugach
Deep Creek
Denali
Kachemak Bay
Totem Bight
Wood-Tikchik
State Forests
Haines
Southeast
Tanana Valley
Alaska Department of Natural Resources
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gates_of_the_Arctic_National_Park_and_Preserve&amp;oldid=702677658"					
				Categories: IUCN Category VIGates of the Arctic National Park and PreserveProtected areas of North Slope Borough, AlaskaProtected areas of Northwest Arctic Borough, AlaskaProtected areas of Yukon–Koyukuk Census Area, AlaskaProtected areas established in 1980ANILCA establishmentsHidden categories: Coordinates on WikidataCommons category with local link different than on Wikidata				
			Navigation menu
						Personal tools
							Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in						
						Namespaces
															Article
															Talk
							Variants
						Views
															Read
															Edit
															View history
						More
							Search
			Navigation
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
			Interaction
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
			Tools
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
			Print/export
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
			Languages
						العربيةБългарскиCatalàDanskDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançaisHrvatskiItalianoLietuviųMagyarNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålPolskiPortuguêsРусскийSlovenčinaSuomiSvenskaTürkçeWinaray中文					
				Edit links			
											 This page was last modified on 1 February 2016, at 01:21.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											Cookie statement
											Mobile view

