img.wp-smiley,
img.emoji {
	display: inline !important;
	border: none !important;
	box-shadow: none !important;
	height: 1em !important;
	width: 1em !important;
	margin: 0 .07em !important;
	vertical-align: -0.1em !important;
	background: none !important;
	padding: 0 !important;
}
.goog-tooltip {display: none !important;}.goog-tooltip:hover {display: none !important;}.goog-text-highlight {background-color: transparent !important; border: none !important; box-shadow: none !important;}#google_language_translator a {display: none !important; }.goog-te-gadget {color:transparent !important;}.goog-te-gadget { font-size:0px !important; }.goog-branding { display:none; }#google_language_translator { display:none; }#flags { display:none; }.goog-te-banner-frame{visibility:hidden !important;}body { top:0px !important;}
		Search the KU Memorial Unions Site
					Search for:
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Providing convenient and needed services to the KU community at over thirty locations, on four KU campuses, requires diligence, sound financial management and your continued patronage. All our services and facilities are provided and operated without the use of tax dollars, freeing up those funds for other academic pursuits by the University.
You can enrich the student experience by funding leadership scholarships, student programs and other initiatives of the KU Memorial Unions. Donations must be made through the KU Endowment Association.
How to Give
Send it by mail: When making a gift by check, please remember to include a gift card or indicate your gift’s purpose on the memo line. Checks should be payable to KU Endowment and mailed to:
&nbsp;
Gift Processing Department
KU Endowment
PO Box 928
Lawrence, KS 66044-0928
&nbsp;
Telephone: Call 888-653-6111 to provide your credit card information over the phone.
Select the giving account name to make an online donation.
Operational Support
Kansas Union Programming
Provides project support for planned improvements of the Union operations. This includes renovations, capital purchases of equipment and amenities.
acct. no. 37166
KU History and Traditions
The Unions love to share KU History, traditions and the accomplishments of its faculty, staff and students. Initiatives currently include KUHistory.com, historical galleries, displays, public lectures and social media. As the gathering place of KU, these initiatives not only entertain and educate, they serve as an important recruiting tool for visitors to campus.
acct. no. 40817
Operational Support for Student Groups and Programs
The Big Event Program
The Big Event connects the KU campus with the Lawrence community by recruiting thousands of student, faculty, and staff volunteers to work at hundreds of local job sites during one day of service. Big Event volunteers provide a helping hand to Lawrence residents by completing projects in their neighborhoods.
acct. no. 40816
KJHK-FM Student-Run Radio
Benefits KJHK, the student-run radio station broadcasting from the Kansas Union. Funds may be used to improve the station in many ways. These include the purchase of equipment, staff education, travel for educational purposes, to enhance news or sports coverage or attend recognition ceremonies.
acct. no. 35138
SUA Enrichment
Provides program support for Student Union Activities initiatives including speaker fees, talent fees and operational expenses related to programs and events.
acct. no. 37241
Scholarships for Students involved in Student Union Activities
Warner Ferguson Service Scholarship
Student Scholarships for students actively engaged in leadership roles in Student Union Activities.
acct. no. 33999
Katherine C. Giele Scholarship
Scholarship granted to active member of Student Union Activities as nominated by Union staff, SUA board member, or alumni member of corporation board of directors.
acct. no. 36320
SUA Academic Support Scholarship
Scholarship granted to active member of SUA in good academic standing.
acct. no. 36452
Frank Burge Scholarship
Scholarships for students actively engaged in leadership roles in Student Union Activities. Must display outstanding character and be in good academic standing with a 3.0 GPA or above. Recipient should have unquestionable integrity who has made significant contributions to the goals of SUA.
acct. no. 35754
Student Union Activities Engagement
Provides undergraduate or graduate scholarships for students demonstrating exceptional leadership skills within SUA. Committee to determine award is approved by the Chancellor.
acct. no. 40522
Scholarships and Support for Students and Union Staff
Pat Beard Unions Scholarship
Scholarship granted to one or more degree-seeking student employees of the Unions. Must have worked previous semester at least 75 hours and continue employment at Union during scholarship period.
acct. no. 36256
Student Leadership
Provides support to students who are active leaders in Union activity, Union program or union-associated endeavor. May be used for, but not limited to scholarships and awards.
acct. no. 40257
The University of Kansas
1301 Jayhawk Blvd.
Lawrence, KS 66045
Union Administration Office: (785) 864-4651
Dining Main Number: (785)-864-7274
Search All of KU
              Close KU Search
            Search Type
              Search KU Web			
              Search KU People					
              Search KU Events										
              Search KU Info
            Search Text
		  KU Campus Links
		  KU Home Kyou Email Blackboard Enroll &amp; Pay
    Translate &raquo;

