      Graduate programs | KU Online
            People Search
        Degree Search
Browse by school    
        Course Search
Search class sections | Online courses
        Library Search
Libraries | Hours &amp; locations | Ask
    Advising | Catalog | Tutors
    Writing Center | Math help room
    Finals Schedule | GPA Calculator
          CMS Login: KU Users | Non-KU Users
    KU Home
    About KU
    Admissions
    Athletics
    Alumni
    Campuses
    Social Media
    Endowment
    KU Today
                                KU Online
                                        Online programs and courses at KU
      Search form
  Search 
      Home
Online programsOverview
Courses
Undergraduate programs
Graduate programs
Noncredit
How it worksProcess
Is it for me?
FAQs
Enrollment
What it costs
State authorization
Help & resources
      MenuHome
Online programsOverview
Courses
Undergraduate programs
Graduate programs
Noncredit
How it worksProcess
Is it for me?
FAQs
Enrollment
What it costs
State authorization
Help & resources
Search
      Search form
  Search 
            HomeOnline programsGraduate programs  
                                Graduate programs
         
	Edwards Campus
	Applied Statistics &amp; Analytics (MS)
	Data analysts are in high demand. This graduate program offers students practical computing and problem-solving skills that can be applied in careers involving healthcare, transportation, insurance and manufacturing among others.  Designed for working professionals, this program is flexible and can be completed 100% online.
	 
	School of Business
	Business Administration (MBA)
	The online MBA program offers three focus areas of study, finance, marketing, and management and leadership, which are all designed to help working professionals advance in their careers.
	 
	School of Education
	Curriculum and Instruction (MSE)
	Designed for current educators, students in this online program focus on applying current theory, research, and technology to curriculum design. Students will learn to use assessment, classroom management and other techniques to strengthen instruction.
	Curriculum and Instruction - Reading (MSE)
	This online program leverages curriculum and instructional strategies to prepare educators as literary specialists.
	Curriculum and Instruction - TESOL (MSE)
	Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages (TESOL) is a practice that can be incorporated into any classroom, regardless of your instructional background. This online program is available as a full master of science degree for those looking to apply their skills either inside or outside of the classroom setting.
	Educational Administration (MSE)
	The master of science degree in education administration shapes experienced pre-K-12 educators to be effective leaders by focusing on educational policy, pedagogy, and practical experience in the field. This program requires face-to-face meetings as well as online study.  A separate fully online program (with internship) is also available.
	Secondary Special Ed and Transition (MSE)
	The online master of science degree in transition education and services provides secondary educators with the skills needed to help students with disabilities transition to adult life.
	Special Education (MSE and Endorsement)
	Led by faculty who are demonstrated leaders and innovators within the field of special education, this online program prepares you to compassionately and expertly engage with students who have mild-to-moderate special needs.
	 
	School of Health Professions
	Dietetics and Nutrition (MS)
	The master’s degree in dietetics and nutrition is offered through a partnership with the Great Plains Interactive Distance Education Alliance. The online program provides professionals in nutrition and other careers with a science background the opportunity to advance their knowledge in the science of nutrition.
	Occupational Therapy (OTD)
	Designed for therapists working in the profession, the online doctor of occupational therapy program offers advanced study in evidence-based practice, professional leadership, specialty practice and teaching.
	 
	School of Journalism and Mass Communications
	Digital Content Strategy (MSJ)
	Students in this online program will learn how to find and analyze data to solve organizational problems. The program consists of two graduate certificates that can be completed individually or taken together to earn the master's degree. 
	 
	School of Nursing
	Nursing (DNP)
	The doctor of nursing practice degree offers students the opportunity to explore evidence-based practice and learn how to be leaders in the health care community. The program is available for students with either a BS or MS in nursing.  Face-to-face meetings as well as online study are required.
	Nursing (MS)
	The online master of science degree in nursing provides advanced study in essential nursing skills, leadership, and research.  Four specialty areas are currently available: clinical research management, nursing informatics, organizational leadership, and public health nursing.
	Nursing (PhD)
	The only doctorate of nursing available in the region, this program prepares graduates for faculty positions, research and philosophical endeavors, and leadership roles in nursing administration. This program requires face-to-face meetings as well as online study.
	 
	School of Pharmacy
	Pharmaceutical Chemistry (MS)
	The online master of science degree in pharmaceutical chemistry enables those working in the private sector or at collaborating institutions to pursue advanced study in the physical/chemical sciences as they relate to pharmaceutical research.
	 
	School of Social Welfare
	Social Work (MSW)
	The master of social work degree prepares students for advanced practice in the clinical social work field or social work administration. This program requires face-to-face meetings as well as online study.
	 
Graduate certificates
School of Business
	Foundations of Business
	Learn the basics of business theory and practice and apply them in your career or education plans. Credits earned from this online certificate may be applied to the full online MBA program.
School of Education
	Autism Spectrum Disorder
	This online certificate program prepares educators, administrators, parents and advocates to work with children and students across the autism spectrum.
	Leadership in Special &amp; Inclusive Education
	Designed for educational professionals, concerned family members and advocates alike, this online certificate program provides the opportunity to learn and expand your knowledge and skills to support students with learning, social and emotional needs.
School of Nursing
	Psychiatric/Mental Health Nurse Practitioner
		Clinical Research Management
		Healthcare Informatics
		Organizational Leadership
		Health Professions Educator
	 
            Why KU Online?
                                    Enrollment &raquo;
                                            Convenient: Fit the course to your schedule 
                                            Accessible: Take an online class from anywhere
                                            Fulfilling: Challenge yourself to the academic rigor of KU’s top faculty
                                            Interactive: Connect with a diverse set of students online
                                            Flexible: Balance school, work, and home life
    KU Today
        Learn more &raquo;
      Contact KU Online
                    onlinelearning@ku.edu
                            785-864-1000
        1455 Jayhawk Blvd.
Budig Hall, Room 4
Lawrence, KS 66045    
    Academics
    Admissions
    Alumni
    Athletics
    Campuses
    Giving
    Jobs
      Contact KU
Lawrence, KS | Maps    
    The University of Kansas prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, ethnicity, religion, sex, national origin, age, ancestry, disability, status as a veteran, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, gender identity, gender expression, and genetic information in the university’s programs and activities. Retaliation is also prohibited by university policy. The following persons have been designated to handle inquiries regarding the nondiscrimination policies and are the Title IX coordinators for their respective campuses: Executive Director of the Office of Institutional Opportunity & Access, IOA@ku.edu, 1246 West Campus Road, Room 153A, Lawrence, KS 66045, 785-864-6414, 711 TTY (for the Lawrence, Edwards, Parsons, Yoder, and Topeka campuses); Director, Equal Opportunity Office, Mail Stop 7004, 4330 Shawnee Mission Parkway, Fairway, KS 66205, 913-588-8011, 711 TTY (for the Wichita, Salina, and Kansas City, Kansas, medical center campuses).

