Grand Canyon National Park - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2010)
Grand Canyon National Park
IUCN category II (national park)
View from the North Rim of the Grand Canyon
Location
Coconino and Mohave counties, Arizona, United States
Nearestcity
Fredonia, Arizona (North Rim)
Tusayan, Arizona (South Rim)
Coordinates
36°03′19″N 112°07′19″W﻿ / ﻿36.0552608°N 112.1218355°W﻿ / 36.0552608; -112.1218355Coordinates: 36°03′19″N 112°07′19″W﻿ / ﻿36.0552608°N 112.1218355°W﻿ / 36.0552608; -112.1218355[1]
Area
1,217,262 acres (1,901.972sqmi; 492,608ha; 4,926.08km2)[2]
Established
February26,1919(1919-02-26)
Visitors
4,756,771 (in2014)[3]
Governingbody
National Park Service
UNESCO World Heritage Site
Type
Natural
Criteria
vii, viii, ix, x
Designated
1979 (3rd session)
Referenceno.
75
State Party
United States
Region
Europe and North America
From Powell Point on the South Rim
Grand Canyon National Park is the United States' 15th oldest national park. Named a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1979, the park is located in Arizona. The park's central feature is the Grand Canyon, a gorge of the Colorado River, which is often considered one of the Seven Natural Wonders of the World. The park covers 1,217,262 acres (1,901.972sqmi; 492,608ha; 4,926.08km2) of unincorporated area in Coconino and Mohave counties.
Contents
1 History
2 Geography
2.1 North Rim
2.2 South Rim
2.2.1 Services
2.2.2 Lodging
3 Activities
3.1 South Rim
3.2 North Rim
4 Development
5 Grand Canyon Association
6 Gallery
7 See also
8 References
9 External links
History[edit]
Grand Canyon was officially designated a national park in 1919,[4] though the landmark had been well known to Americans for over thirty years prior.[5] In 1903, President Theodore Roosevelt visited the site and said: "The Grand Canyon fills me with awe. It is beyond comparison—beyond description; absolutely unparalleled through-out the wide world... Let this great wonder of nature remain as it now is. Do nothing to mar its grandeur, sublimity and loveliness. You cannot improve on it. But what you can do is to keep it for your children, your children's children, and all who come after you, as the one great sight which every American should see."[6]
Despite Roosevelt's enthusiasm and his strong interest in preserving land for public use, the Grand Canyon was not immediately designated as a national park. The first bill to establish Grand Canyon National Park was introduced in 1882 by then-Senator Benjamin Harrison, which would have established Grand Canyon as the second national park in the United States after Yellowstone. Harrison unsuccessfully reintroduced his bill in 1883 and 1886; after his election to the presidency, he established the Grand Canyon Forest Reserve in 1893. Theodore Roosevelt created the Grand Canyon Game Preserve by proclamation on 28 November 1906[7] and Grand Canyon National Monument in 1908. Further Senate bills to establish the site as a national park were introduced and defeated in 1910 and 1911, before the Grand Canyon National Park Act was finally signed by President Woodrow Wilson in 1919. The National Park Service, established in 1916, assumed administration of the park.
The creation of the park was an early success of the conservation movement. Its national park status may have helped thwart proposals to dam the Colorado River within its boundaries. (Later, the Glen Canyon Dam would be built upriver.) In 1975, the former Marble Canyon National Monument, which followed the Colorado River northeast from the Grand Canyon to Lee's Ferry, was made part of Grand Canyon National Park. In 1979, UNESCO declared the park a World Heritage Site.
In 2010, Grand Canyon National Park was honored with its own coin under the America the Beautiful Quarters program.[8]
Geography[edit]
The Grand Canyon, including its extensive system of tributary canyons, is valued for its combination of size, depth, and exposed layers of colorful rocks dating back to Precambrian times. The canyon itself was created by the incision of the Colorado River and its tributaries after the Colorado Plateau was uplifted, causing the Colorado River system to develop along its present path.
The primary public areas of the park are the North and South Rims of the Grand Canyon itself. The rest of the park is extremely rugged and remote, although many places are accessible by pack trail and backcountry roads. Only the Navajo Bridge near Page connects the rims by road in Arizona; this journey can take around five hours by car. Otherwise, the two rims of the Canyon are connected via the Mike O'Callaghan–Pat Tillman Memorial Bridge and the Hoover Dam.[9]
The park headquarters are at Grand Canyon Village, not far from the south entrance to the park, near one of the most popular viewpoints. Park accommodations are operated by Xanterra Parks and Resorts.
North Rim[edit]
The North Rim is a smaller, more remote area with less tourist activity. It is accessed by Arizona State Route 67.[10]
South Rim[edit]
From Desert View on the South Rim
The South Rim is more accessible than the North Rim;[11] most visitors to the park come to the South Rim, arriving on Arizona State Route 64. The highway enters the park through the South Entrance, near Tusayan, Arizona, and heads eastward, leaving the park through the East Entrance.[11] Interstate 40 provides access to the area from the south. From the north, U.S. Route 89 connects Utah, Colorado, and the North Rim to the South Rim.[12] Overall, some thirty miles of the South Rim are accessible by road.
Services[edit]
The Grand Canyon Village is located at the north end of U.S. Route 180, coming from Flagstaff. It is a full-service community, including lodging, fuel, food, souvenirs, a hospital, churches, and access to trails and guided walks and talks.[9]
Lodging[edit]
Several lodging facilities are available along the South Rim. Hotels and other lodging include: El Tovar, Bright Angel Lodge, Kachina Lodge, Thunderbird Lodge, and Maswik Lodge, all of which are located in the village area, and Phantom Ranch, located on the canyon floor. There is also an RV Park named Trailer Village. All of these facilities are managed by Xanterra Parks &amp; Resorts, while the Yavapai Lodge (also in the village area) is managed by Delaware North.[13]
On the North rim there is the historic Grand Canyon Lodge[13] managed by Forever Resorts and a campground near the lodge, managed by the National Park staff.[14]
Activities[edit]
South Rim[edit]
Play media
A 6-minute video of a flight over the Grand Canyon
A variety of activities at the South Rim cater to park visitors. The South Rim Drive (35 miles (56km) is a driving tour split into two segments. The western drive to Hermit's Point is 8 miles (13km) with several overlooks along the way, including Mohave Point, Hopi Point, and the Powell Memorial.[9] From March to December, access to Hermit's Rest is restricted to the free shuttle provided by the Park Service. The eastern portion to Desert View is 25 miles (40km), and is open to private vehicles year round.
Walking tours include the Rim Trail, which runs west from the Pipe Creek viewpoint for about 8 miles (13km) of paved road, followed by 7 miles (11km) unpaved to Hermit's Rest. Hikes can begin almost anywhere along this trail, and a shuttle can return hikers to their point of origin. Mather Point, the first view most people reach when entering from the South Entrance, is a popular place to begin.
Private canyon flyovers are provided by helicopters and small airplanes out of Las Vegas, Phoenix, and the Grand Canyon National Park Airport. Due to a crash in the 1990s, scenic flights are no longer allowed to fly within 1,500 feet (460m) of the rim within the Grand Canyon National Park.[citation needed] Several companies offer flights that land 3,500 feet (1,100m) in the Grand Canyon in Hualapai Indian territory.[15]
North Rim[edit]
From Toroweap Overlook on the North Rim
On the North Rim there are few roads, however, there are some notable vehicle accessible lookout points including Point Imperial, Roosevelt Point, and Cape Royal. Mule rides are also available that go to a variety of places including several thousand feet down into the canyon.
Many visitors to the North Rim choose to make use of the variety of hiking trails including the Widforss Trail, Uncle Jim's Trail, the Transept Trail, and the North Kaibab Trail, the latter of which can be followed all the way down to the Colorado River, and to across to the South Kaibab Trail and the Bright Angel Trail, which continue up to the south rim of the Grand Canyon.
The Toroweap Overlook is located in the western part of the park on the North Rim. Access is via unpaved roads off Route 389 west of Fredonia, Arizona. The roads lead through Grand Canyon-Parashant National Monument and to the overlook.
Development[edit]
The US government had halted development of a 1.6 million acres area including the National Park from 1966 to 2009, during the Bennett Freeze, because of an ownership dispute between Hopi and Navajo.[16]
Grand Canyon Association[edit]
Main article: Grand Canyon Association
The Grand Canyon Association (GCA) is the National Park Service's official nonprofit partner. It raises private funds to benefit Grand Canyon National Park by operating retail shops and visitor centers within the park, and providing educational opportunities about the natural and cultural history of the region.
Gallery[edit]
An aerial view of the Little Colorado River Gorge near East Rim of Grand Canyon
A 1938 poster of Grand Canyon National Park
From the North Rim
From the South Rim
Colorado River from the South Rim
A rockfall from the North Rim
From the South Rim in winter
See also[edit]
Arizona portal
List of trails in Grand Canyon National Park
References[edit]
^ "Grand Canyon National Park Visitor Center". Geographic Names Information System. United States Geological Survey. Retrieved 2011-08-14.
^ "Listing of acreage as of December 31, 2011". Land Resource Division, National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-07.
^ "NPS Annual Recreation Visits Report". National Park Service. Retrieved 2015-06-28.
^ Yanagihara, Wendy; Denniston, Jennifer (2008). Grand Canyon National Park. Lonely Planet. p.95. ISBN1741044839. |access-date= requires |url= (help)
^ Anderson, Michael F. "Polishing the Jewel: An Administrative History of Grand Canyon National Park" (PDF). Grand Canyon Association. Retrieved 7 December 2015.
^ Pryputniewicz, Vanya; Peterson, Peter. "Grand Canyon National Park Presents Living History Performance of President Theodore Roosevelt". nps.gov. Retrieved 27 February 2015.
^ http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/USCODE-2011-title16/pdf/USCODE-2011-title16-chap6-sec687.pdf
^ "Grand Canyon Coin Introduced" (PDF). United States Mint. 2010. Retrieved 27 February 2015. The Grand Canyon National Park Quarter is the fourth coin of 2010 in the America the Beautiful Quarters® Program. The reverse image features a view of the granaries above the Nankoweap Delta in Marble Canyon near the Colorado River.
^ a b c South Rim, Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona; National Park Service; US Government Printing Office; 1972
^ "How Do I Travel to the North Rim?". National Park Service. Retrieved 7 December 2015.
^ a b Rand McNally; National Park Buide; Michael Frome; Rand McNally &amp; Company, Chicago; 1970; pg 47
^ Rand McNally, Road Atlas, United States, Canada, Mexico; 2010
^ a b "Lodging". National Park Service. Retrieved 7 December 2015.
^ "Campgrounds - North Rim". National Park Service. Retrieved 7 December 2015.
^ "How far into the Canyon does helicopter tours land?".
^ Kate Linthicum (November 5, 2009). "Trying to be rebuild after 40 frozen years". Retrieved 5 March 2015.
External links[edit]
Find more about
Grand Canyon National Park
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Commons
News stories from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Source texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity
External images
 Public domain images from the National Park Service.
Official website
Grand Canyon National Park Lodge
Grand Canyon National Park at DMOZ
Interactive Google Maps Hiking Guide
Historic American Landscapes Survey (HALS) No.AZ-6, "Mather Point Overlook, South Entrance Road, Grand Canyon Village, Coconino County, AZ", 23photos, 3measured drawings, 2data pages
 Geographic data related to Grand Canyon National Park at OpenStreetMap
v
t
e
National parks of the United States
Acadia
American Samoa
Arches
Badlands
Big Bend
Biscayne
Black Canyon of the Gunnison
Bryce Canyon
Canyonlands
Capitol Reef
Carlsbad Caverns
Channel Islands
Congaree
Crater Lake
Cuyahoga Valley
Death Valley
Denali
Dry Tortugas
Everglades
Gates of the Arctic
Glacier
Glacier Bay
Grand Canyon
Grand Teton
Great Basin
Great Sand Dunes
Great Smoky Mountains
Guadalupe Mountains
Haleakalā
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes
Hot Springs
Isle Royale
Joshua Tree
Katmai
Kenai Fjords
Kings Canyon
Kobuk Valley
Lake Clark
Lassen Volcanic
Mammoth Cave
Mesa Verde
Mount Rainier
North Cascades
Olympic
Petrified Forest
Pinnacles
Redwood
Rocky Mountain
Saguaro
Sequoia
Shenandoah
Theodore Roosevelt
Virgin Islands
Voyageurs
Wind Cave
Wrangell–St. Elias
Yellowstone
Yosemite
Zion
List of national parks of the United States (by elevation)
v
t
e
Colorado River system
Jurisdictions
United States
Arizona
California
Colorado
Nevada
New Mexico
Utah
Wyoming
Mexico
Baja California
Sonora
Canyons
Byers Canyon
Gore Canyon
Red Gorge
Glenwood Canyon
De Beque Canyon
Horsethief Canyon
Ruby Canyon
Westwater Canyon
Cataract Canyon
Narrow Canyon
Glen Canyon
Grand Canyon
Marble Canyon
Granite Gorge
Middle Granite Gorge
Lower Granite Gorge
Grand Wash Canyon
Iceberg Canyon
Virgin Canyon
Boulder Canyon
Black Canyon
Pyramid Canyon
Mohave Canyon
Natural features
River course
Rocky Mountains
Colorado River Basin
Colorado Plateau
Grand Lake
Horseshoe Bend
Sonoran Desert
Mojave Desert
Mohave Valley
Parker Valley
Palo Verde Valley
Colorado Desert
Salton Sea
Imperial Valley
New River
Delta
Montague Island
Gulf of California/Sea of Cortez
Tributaries
Blue River
Dirty Devil River
Dolores River
Escalante River
Eagle River
Fraser River
Gila River
Green River
Gunnison River
Kanab Creek
Little Colorado River
Paria River
Roaring Fork River
San Juan River
Virgin River
Williams Fork
Engineering
Mainstem dams
Shadow Mountain
Granby
Windy Gap
Grand Valley
Price-Stubb
Glen Canyon
Hoover
Davis
Parker
Headgate Rock
Palo Verde
Imperial
Laguna
Morelos
Major reservoirs
Fontenelle Reservoir
Flaming Gorge Reservoir
Blue Mesa Reservoir
Navajo Lake
Lake Powell
Lake Mead
Lake Mohave
Lake Havasu
Imperial Reservoir
Theodore Roosevelt Lake
San Carlos Lake
Aqueducts and
canals
Grand Ditch
Colorado River Aqueduct
San Diego Aqueduct
Central Arizona Project
All-American Canal
Coachella Canal
Water projects
Boulder Canyon Project
Colorado-Big Thompson Project
Colorado River Storage Project
Grand Valley AVA
Yuma Project
Designated areas
Arches National Park
Canyonlands National Park
Colorado National Monument
Dead Horse Point State Park
Glen Canyon National Recreation Area
Grand Canyon National Park
Lake Mead National Recreation Area
Rocky Mountain National Park
Related topics
Arizona v. California
Colorado River Board of California
Colorado River Compact
Floyd Dominy
Lee's Ferry
International Boundary and Water Commission
Metropolitan Water District of Southern California
Rapids and features
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation
William Mulholland
v
t
e
Protected areas of Arizona
Federal
National Parks
Grand Canyon
Petrified Forest
Saguaro
National Historical Parks,
Historic Sites and Memorials
Tumacácori NHP
Fort Bowie NHS
Hubbell Trading Post NHS
Coronado NMem
National Monuments
National Park Service
Canyon de Chelly
Casa Grande Ruins
Chiricahua
Grand Canyon-Parashant
Hohokam Pima
Montezuma Castle
Navajo
Organ Pipe Cactus
Pipe Spring
Sunset Crater
Tonto
Tuzigoot
Walnut Canyon
Wupatki
Bureau of Land Management
Agua Fria
Ironwood Forest
Sonoran Desert
Vermilion Cliffs
National Conservation Areas
Gila Box Riparian
Las Cienegas
San Pedro Riparian
National Recreation Areas
Glen Canyon
Lake Mead
National Trails
Arizona National Scenic Trail
Juan Bautista de Anza National Historic Trail
Old Spanish National Historic Trail
National Forests
Apache-Sitgreaves
Coconino
Elden Pueblo
Palatki Heritage Site
V-Bar-V Heritage Site
Coronado
Kaibab
Prescott
Tonto
National Wildlife Refuges
Bill Williams River
Buenos Aires
Cabeza Prieta
Cibola
Havasu
Imperial
Kofa
Leslie Canyon
San Bernardino
Wilderness Areas
See List of Arizona Wilderness Areas
Wild and Scenic Rivers
Fossil Creek
Verde River
State
State Parks
Alamo Lake
Boyce Thompson Arboretum
Buckskin Mountain
Catalina
Cattail Cove
Dead Horse Ranch
Fool Hollow Lake
Fort Verde
Homolovi
Jerome
Kartchner Caverns
Lake Havasu
Lost Dutchman
Lyman Lake
McFarland
Oracle
Patagonia Lake
Picacho Peak
Red Rock
Riordan Mansion
River Island
Roper Lake
San Rafael
Slide Rock
Sonoita Creek
Tombstone Courthouse
Tonto Natural Bridge
Tubac Presidio
Verde River Greenway
Yuma Quartermaster Depot
Yuma Territorial Prison
Wildlife areas
Becker Lake
Cluff Ranch
Luna Lake
Mittry Lake
Powers Butte
Santa Rita
White Mountain Grasslands
Willcox Playa
Municipal
Nature parks
Phoenix Mountains Park and Recreation Area
South Mountain Park
Papago Park
Other
National Natural Landmarks
See List of National Natural Landmarks in Arizona
National Historic Landmarks
See List of National Historic Landmarks in Arizona
Historic Places
See National Register of Historic Places listings in Arizona
Arizona State Parks (web)
v
t
e
World Heritage Sites in the United States
Northeast
Independence Hall
Statue of Liberty
Midwest
Cahokia
South
Everglades
Great Smoky Mountains
Mammoth Cave
Monticello and the University of Virginia
Poverty Point
San Antonio Missions
West
Carlsbad Caverns
Chaco Culture National Historical Park
Grand Canyon National Park
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park
Kluane-Wrangell–St. Elias-Glacier Bay-Tatshenshini-Alsek1
Mesa Verde
Olympic National Park
Pueblo de Taos
Papahānaumokuākea
Redwood
Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park1
Yellowstone National Park
Yosemite National Park
Territories
La Fortaleza and San Juan National Historic Site
1 Shared with Canada
Authority control
VIAF: 138534683
GND: 4549234-7
SUDOC: 167776509
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Grand_Canyon_National_Park&amp;oldid=701760546"					
				Categories: IUCN Category IIGrand Canyon National Park1919 establishments in ArizonaGrand CanyonParks in Coconino County, ArizonaParks in Mohave County, ArizonaProtected areas established in 1919Protected areas on the Colorado RiverWorld Heritage Sites in the United StatesHidden categories: Pages using citations with accessdate and no URLArticles needing additional references from May 2010All articles needing additional referencesCoordinates on WikidataArticles which use infobox templates with no data rowsAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from May 2012Articles with DMOZ linksWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersArticles containing video clips				
			Navigation menu
						Personal tools
							Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in						
						Namespaces
															Article
															Talk
							Variants
						Views
															Read
															Edit
															View history
						More
							Search
			Navigation
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
			Interaction
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
			Tools
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
			Print/export
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
			Languages
						العربيةAzərbaycancaБългарскиBosanskiCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançais한국어हिन्दीHrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaItalianoქართულიKurdîLietuviųMagyarമലയാളംNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålPolskiPortuguêsRuna SimiРусскийShqipSlovenčinaSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng ViệtZazaki中文					
				Edit links			
											 This page was last modified on 26 January 2016, at 12:28.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											Cookie statement
											Mobile view

