Great Smoky Mountains National Park - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Entrance to the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, from Cherokee, North Carolina
Location
Swain &amp; Haywood counties in North Carolina; Sevier, Blount, &amp; Cocke counties in Tennessee, U.S.
Nearestcity
Cherokee, North Carolina and Gatlinburg, Tennessee
Coordinates
35°41′N 83°32′W﻿ / ﻿35.683°N 83.533°W﻿ / 35.683; -83.533Coordinates: 35°41′N 83°32′W﻿ / ﻿35.683°N 83.533°W﻿ / 35.683; -83.533
Area
522,419 acres (816.280sqmi; 211,415ha; 2,114.15km2)[1]
Visitors
10,099,276 (in2014)[2]
Governingbody
National Park Service
UNESCO World Heritage Site
Type
Natural
Criteria
VII, VIII, IX, X
Designated
1983 (7th session)
Referenceno.
259
State Party
United States
Region
North America
Great Smoky Mountains National Park is a United States National Park and UNESCO World Heritage Site that straddles the ridgeline of the Great Smoky Mountains, part of the Blue Ridge Mountains, which are a division of the larger Appalachian Mountain chain. The border between Tennessee and North Carolina runs northeast to southwest through the centerline of the park. It is the most visited national park in the United States.[3] On its route from Maine to Georgia, the Appalachian Trail also passes through the center of the park. The park was chartered by the United States Congress in 1934 and officially dedicated by President Franklin Delano Roosevelt in 1940.[4] It encompasses 522,419 acres (816.28sqmi; 211,415.47ha; 2,114.15km2),[1] making it one of the largest protected areas in the eastern United States. The main park entrances are located along U.S. Highway 441 (Newfound Gap Road) at the towns of Gatlinburg, Tennessee, and Cherokee, North Carolina. It was the first national park whose land and other costs were paid for in part with federal funds; previous parks were funded wholly with state money or private funds.[5]
Contents
1 History
2 Geology
3 Natural features
4 Attractions and activities
4.1 Hiking
4.2 Other activities
5 Historic areas within the national park
5.1 Historic districts
5.2 Individual listings
6 Electric vehicles
7 Air pollution
8 See also
9 Notes
10 References
11 External links
History[edit]
The Great Smoky Mountains, in Great Smoky Mountains National Park
Before the arrival of European settlers, the region was part of the homeland of the Cherokees. Frontierspeople began settling the land in the 18th and early 19th century. In 1830 President Andrew Jackson signed the Indian Removal Act, beginning the process that eventually resulted in the forced removal of all Indian tribes east of the Mississippi River to what is now Oklahoma. Many of the Cherokee left, but some, led by renegade warrior Tsali, hid out in the area that is now the Great Smoky Mountains National Park. Some of their descendants now live in the Qualla Boundary to the south of the park.
The Becky Cable House in Cades Cove
Streams flow throughout much of the park.
The Carlos Campbell Overlook is named for a Knoxville, Tennessee businessman who pushed for the establishment of the national park.
Great-Smoky-Mountains Panorama
Waterfall
As white settlers arrived, logging grew as a major industry in the mountains, and a rail line, the Little River Railroad, was constructed in the late-19th Century to haul timber out of the remote regions of the area. Cut-and-run-style clearcutting was destroying the natural beauty of the area, so visitors and locals banded together to raise money for preservation of the land. The U.S. National Park Service wanted a park in the eastern United States, but did not have much money to establish one. Though Congress had authorized the park in 1926, there was no nucleus of federally owned land around which to build a park. John D. Rockefeller, Jr., contributed $5 million, the U.S. government added $2 million, and private citizens from Tennessee and North Carolina pitched in to assemble the land for the park, piece by piece. Slowly, mountain homesteaders, miners, and loggers were evicted from the land. Farms and timbering operations were abolished to establish the protected areas of the park. Travel writer Horace Kephart, for whom Mount Kephart was named, and photographer George Masa were instrumental in fostering the development of the park.[5] Former Governor Ben W. Hooper of Tennessee was the principal land purchasing agent for the park,[6] which was officially established on June 15, 1934. During the Great Depression, the Civilian Conservation Corps, the Works Progress Administration, and other federal organizations made trails, fire watchtowers, and other infrastructure improvements to the park and Smoky Mountains.
It was also a site for filming of parts of Disney's hit 1950s TV series, Davy Crockett, King of the Wild Frontier.
This park was designated an International Biosphere Reserve in 1976, was certified as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1983, and became a part of the Southern Appalachian Biosphere Reserve in 1988.[7]
A 75th anniversary re-dedication ceremony was held on September 2, 2009. Among those in attendance were all four US Senators, the three US Representatives whose districts include the park, the governors of both states, and Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar. Tennessee native, singer, and actress Dolly Parton also attended and performed.
Geology[edit]
The majority of rocks in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park are Late Precambrian rocks that are part of the Ocoee Supergroup. This group consists of metamorphosed sandstones, phyllites, schists, and slate. Early Precambrian rocks are not only the oldest rocks in the park but also the dominant rock type in sites such as the Raven Fork Valley and upper Tuckasegee River between Cherokee and Bryson City. They primarily consist of metamorphic gneiss, granite, and schist. Cambrian sedimentary rocks can be found among the bottom of the Foothills to the northwest and in limestone coves such as Cades Cove.[8] One of the most visited attractions in the mountains is Cades Cove which is a window or an area where older rocks made out of sandstone surround the valley floor of younger rocks made out of limestone.
The oldest rocks in the Smokies are the Precambrian gneiss and schists which were formed over a billion years ago from the accumulation of marine sediments and igneous rock. In the Late Precambrian, the primordial ocean expanded and the more recent Ocoee Supergroup rocks formed from the accumulation of eroding land mass onto the continental shelf. In the Paleozoic Era, the ocean deposited a thick layer of marine sediments which left behind sedimentary rock. During the Ordovician Period, the collision of the North American and African tectonic plates initiated the Alleghenian orogeny that created the Appalachian range. During the Mesozoic Era rapid erosion of softer sedimentary rocks re-exposed the older Ocoee Supergroup formations.[9]
Natural features[edit]
Elevations in the park range from 876 feet (267m) at the mouth of Abrams Creek to 6,643 feet (2,025m) at the summit of Clingmans Dome. Within the park a total of sixteen mountains reach higher than 6,000 feet (1,830m).[10]
The wide range of elevations mimics the latitudinal changes found throughout the entire eastern United States. Indeed, ascending the mountains is comparable to a trip from Tennessee to Canada. Plants and animals common in the country's Northeast have found suitable ecological niches in the park's higher elevations, while southern species find homes in the balmier lower reaches.
The observation tower at Clingmans Dome, the highest point in the national park.
During the most recent ice age, the northeast-to-southwest orientation of the Appalachian mountains allowed species to migrate southward along the slopes rather than finding the mountains to be a barrier. As climate warms, many northern species are now retreating upward along the slopes and withdrawing northward,[11] while southern species are expanding.[12]
The park normally has very high humidity and precipitation, averaging from 55 inches (1,400mm) per year in the valleys to 85 inches (2,200mm) per year on the peaks. This is more annual rainfall than anywhere in the United States outside the Pacific Northwest and parts of Alaska and Hawaii. It is also generally cooler than the lower elevations below, and most of the park has a humid continental climate more comparable to locations much farther north, as opposed to the humid subtropical climate in the lowlands. The park is almost 95 percent forested, and almost 36 percent of it, 187,000 acres (76,000ha), is estimated by the Park Service to be old growth forest with many trees that predate European settlement of the area.[13] It is one of the largest blocks of deciduous, temperate, old growth forest in North America.
The variety of elevations, the abundant rainfall, and the presence of old growth forests give the park an unusual richness of biota. About 10,000 species of plants and animals are known to live in the park, and estimates as high as an additional 90,000 undocumented species may also be present.
Park officials count more than 200 species of birds, 66 species of mammals, 50 species of fish, 39 species of reptiles, and 43 species of amphibians, including many lungless salamanders. The park has a noteworthy black bear population, numbering about 1,500.[14] An experimental re-introduction of elk (wapiti) into the park began in 2001.
Over 100 species of trees grow in the park. The lower region forests are dominated by deciduous leafy trees. At higher altitudes, deciduous forests give way to coniferous trees like Fraser fir. In addition, the park has over 1,400 flowering plant species and over 4,000 species of non-flowering plants.
Attractions and activities[edit]
The Alum Cave Bluffs trail to the summit of Mount LeConte provides numerous overlooks of the Great Smoky Mountains
The Great Smoky Mountains National Park is a major tourist attraction in the region. Over 9 million tourists and 11 million non-recreational visitors traveled to the park in 2010, more than twice as many visitors as the Grand Canyon, the second most visited national park.[15] Surrounding towns, notably Gatlinburg, Pigeon Forge, Sevierville, and Townsend, Tennessee, and Cherokee, Sylva, Maggie Valley, and Bryson City, North Carolina receive a significant portion of their income from tourism associated with the park.
The two main visitors' centers inside the park are Sugarlands Visitors' Center near the Gatlinburg entrance to the park and Oconaluftee Visitor Center near Cherokee, North Carolina at the eastern entrance to the park. These ranger stations provide exhibits on wildlife, geology, and the history of the park. They also sell books, maps, and souvenirs. Unlike most other national parks, there is no entry fee to the park.[16]
U.S. Highway 441 (known in the park as Newfound Gap Road) bisects the park, providing automobile access to many trailheads and overlooks, most notably that of Newfound Gap. At an elevation of 5,048 feet (1,539m), it is the lowest gap in the mountains and is situated near the center of the park, on the Tennessee/North Carolina state line, halfway between the border towns of Gatlinburg and Cherokee. It was here that in 1940, from the Rockefeller Memorial, Franklin Delano Roosevelt dedicated the national park. On clear days Newfound Gap offers arguably the most spectacular scenes accessible via highway in the park.
The park has a number of historical attractions. The most well-preserved of these (and most popular) is Cades Cove, a valley with a number of preserved historic buildings including log cabins, barns, and churches. Cades Cove is the single most frequented destination in the national park. Self-guided automobile and bicycle tours offer the many sightseers a glimpse into the way of life of old-time southern Appalachia. Other historical areas within the park include Roaring Fork, Cataloochee, Elkmont, and the Mountain Farm Museum and Mingus Mill at Oconaluftee.
Hiking[edit]
Main article: Hiking in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park
The Chimney Tops is a popular destination for hikers.
There are 850 miles (1,370km) of trails and unpaved roads in the park for hiking, including seventy miles of the Appalachian Trail.[17] Mount Le Conte is one of the most frequented destinations in the park. Its elevation is 6,593 feet (2,010m) — the third highest summit in the park and, measured from its base to its highest peak, the tallest mountain east of the Mississippi River. Alum Cave Trail is the most heavily used of the five paths en route to the summit. It provides many scenic overlooks and unique natural attractions such as Alum Cave Bluffs and Arch Rock. Hikers may spend a night at the LeConte Lodge, located near the summit, which provides cabins and rooms for rent (except during the winter season). Accessible solely by trail, it is the only private lodging available inside the park.
Another popular hiking trail leads to the pinnacle of the Chimney Tops, so named because of its unique dual-humped peaktops. This short but strenuous trek rewards nature enthusiasts with a spectacular panorama of the surrounding mountain peaks.
Both the Laurel Falls and Clingman's Dome trails offer relatively easy, short, paved paths to their respective destinations. The Laurel Falls Trail leads to a powerful 80-foot (24m) waterfall, and the Clingman's Dome Trail takes visitors on an uphill climb to a fifty-foot observation deck, which on a clear day offers views for many miles over the Tennessee, North Carolina, and Georgia mountains.
In addition to day hiking, the national park offers opportunities for backpacking and camping. Camping is allowed only in designated camping areas and shelters. Most of the park's trail shelters are located along the Appalachian Trail or a short distance away on side trails. In addition to the Appalachian Trail shelters used mostly for extended backpacking trips there are three shelters in the park that are not located on the Appalachian Trail.
The Mt. LeConte Shelter is located a short distance east of LeConte Lodge on The Boulevard Trail. It can accommodate 12 people per night, and is the only backcountry site in the entire park that has a permanent ban on campfires.
The Kephart Shelter is located at the terminus of the Kephart Prong Trail which begins upstream of the Collins Creek Picnic Area. The shelter, situated along a tributary of the Oconaluftee River can accommodate 14 people.
Laurel Gap Shelter is one of the more remote shelters in the park. Situated in a Beech forest swag between Balsam High Top and Big Cataloochee Mountain, the Laurel Gap Shelter can accommodate up to 14 people per night. This shelter is a popular base camp for peakbaggers exploring the heart of the Smokies wilderness.
Designated backcountry campsites are scattered throughout the park. A permit, available at ranger stations and trailheads, is required for all backcountry camping. Additionally, reservations are required for many of the campsites and all of the shelters. A maximum stay of one night, in the case of shelters, or three nights, in the case of campsites, may limit the traveler's itinerary.
Other activities[edit]
After hiking and simple sightseeing, fishing (especially fly fishing) is the most popular activity in the national park. The park's waters have long had a reputation for healthy trout activity as well as challenging fishing terrain. Brook trout are native to the waters, while both brown and rainbow were introduced to the area. Partially due to the fact of recent droughts killing off the native fish, there are strict regulations regarding how fishing may be conducted. Horseback riding (offered by the national park and on limited trails), bicycling (available for rent in Cades Cove) and water tubing are all also practiced within the park.
Cades Cove Panorama
Historic areas within the national park[edit]
See also: List of historical structures maintained by the Great Smoky Mountains National Park
The park service maintains four historic districts and one archaeological district within park boundaries, as well as nine individual listings on the National Register of Historic Places. Notable structures not listed include the Mountain Farm Museum buildings at Oconaluftee and buildings in the Cataloochee area. The Mingus Mill (in Oconaluftee) and Smoky Mountain Hiking Club cabin in Greenbrier have been deemed eligible for listing.
Historic districts[edit]
Cades Cove Historic District
Elkmont Historic District
Oconaluftee Archaeological District
Noah Ogle Place
Roaring Fork Historic District
Individual listings[edit]
Hannah Cabin in Little Cataloochee, was built in the mid-1800s by John Jackson Hannah, the son of early pioneer Evan Hannah. The cabin's brick chimney is one of only three in the Smoky Mountains.
Alex Cole Cabin
Clingmans Dome Observation Tower
Hall Cabin (in Hazel Creek area)
John Messer Barn
John Ownby Cabin
Oconaluftee Baptist Church (also called Smokemont Baptist Church)
Tyson McCarter Place
Mayna Treanor Avent Studio
Little Greenbrier School
Walker Sisters Place
Electric vehicles[edit]
The National Park Service (NPS) announced in late 2001 that it would use electric vehicles (EVs) provided by the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) for a research project in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park to evaluate the vehicles' performance in mountainous terrain. The NPS said the EVs will be on loan from TVA for two years and will be used by park service staff at Cades Cove and the Great Smoky Mountains Institute at Tremont to determine the benefits provided by these vehicles versus standard gasoline-fueled vehicles.[18]
Air pollution[edit]
Great Smoky Mountains National Park is considered the most polluted national park according to a 2004 report by the National Parks Conservation Association. From 1999 to 2003, the park recorded approximately 150 unhealthy air days, the equivalent of about one month of unhealthy air days per year.[19][20]
See also[edit]
Great Smoky Mountains Association
Great Smoky Mountains Heritage Center
Wildflowers of the Great Smoky Mountains
Notes[edit]
^ a b "Listing of acreage as of December 31, 2011". Land Resource Division, National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-07.
^ "NPS Annual Recreation Visits Report". National Park Service. Retrieved 2015-06-28.
^ GSMNP main page - National Park Service
^ GSMNP stories - National Park Service
^ a b The National Parks: America's Best Idea. Ken Burns, broadcast on PBS.
^ "Ben W. Hooper". tennesseeencyclopedia.net. Retrieved August 13, 2012.
^ MAB Biosphere Reserves Directory - UNESCO
^ Moore, Harry (1988). A Roadside Guide to the Geology of the Great Smoky Mountains National Park. Knoxville, Tennessee: University of Tennessee Press. p.32.
^ Houk, Rose, 1993, Great Smoky Mountains: A Natural History Guide, Mariner Books, pp 10-17, ISBN 978-0395599204
^ "Natural Features &amp; Ecosystems". US National Park Service. Retrieved 2007-07-20.
^ Becky Johnson. "A sanctuary for scientists: Smokies’ slopes seen as frontier in global warming research". Smoky Mountain News. Retrieved 2011-01-27.
^ "Climate Change in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park" (PDF). Macalester College. Retrieved 2011-01-27.
^ Mary Byrd Davis (23 January 2008). "Old Growth in the East: A Survey. North Carolina" (PDF).
^ "Black Bears - Great Smoky Mountains National Park". National Park Service.
^ [1]
^ Why No Entrance Fee? National Park Service.
^ GSMNP Just for Fun, National Park Service
^ http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-80785319.html
^ Feanny, Camille (2004-06-24). "Smokies top list of most polluted parks". CNN. Retrieved 2009-12-28.
^ "New Report Ranks Five Most-Polluted National Parks". National Parks Conservation Association. 2004-06-24. Retrieved 2010-06-14.
References[edit]
Saferstein, Mark. 2004. Great Smoky Mountains. 22nd ed. American Parks Network.
Tilden, Freeman. 1970. The National Parks
"Old-Time Smoky Mountain Music: 34 Historic Songs, Ballads, and Instrumentals Recorded in the Great Smoky Mountains by 'Song Catcher' Joseph S. Hall" (CD released by the Great Smoky Mountains Association, 2010).
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Great Smoky Mountains National Park.
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Great Smoky Mountains National Park.
Official site: Great Smoky Mountains National Park
Lookout Rock webcam and current air quality data
Great Smoky Mountains National Park at NASA Earth Observatory
Official Nonprofit Expert Nature Hikes
Guide to records (general administrative files) from the Great Smoky Mountains National Park
Great Smoky Mountains Association — Nonprofit Partner of the Park, videos, photos, maps, and more
v
t
e
National parks of the United States
Acadia
American Samoa
Arches
Badlands
Big Bend
Biscayne
Black Canyon of the Gunnison
Bryce Canyon
Canyonlands
Capitol Reef
Carlsbad Caverns
Channel Islands
Congaree
Crater Lake
Cuyahoga Valley
Death Valley
Denali
Dry Tortugas
Everglades
Gates of the Arctic
Glacier
Glacier Bay
Grand Canyon
Grand Teton
Great Basin
Great Sand Dunes
Great Smoky Mountains
Guadalupe Mountains
Haleakalā
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes
Hot Springs
Isle Royale
Joshua Tree
Katmai
Kenai Fjords
Kings Canyon
Kobuk Valley
Lake Clark
Lassen Volcanic
Mammoth Cave
Mesa Verde
Mount Rainier
North Cascades
Olympic
Petrified Forest
Pinnacles
Redwood
Rocky Mountain
Saguaro
Sequoia
Shenandoah
Theodore Roosevelt
Virgin Islands
Voyageurs
Wind Cave
Wrangell–St. Elias
Yellowstone
Yosemite
Zion
List of national parks of the United States (by elevation)
v
t
e
Protected areas of North Carolina
Federal
National Parks
Great Smoky Mountains
National Historic Sites
Carl Sandburg Home
Fort Raleigh
National Memorials
Wright Brothers
National Military Parks
Guilford Courthouse
National Battlefields
Moores Creek
National Parkways
Blue Ridge Parkway
(Crabtree Falls
Craggy Gardens
Cumberland Knob
Doughton Park
E.B. Jeffress Park
Julian Price Memorial Park
Linville Falls
Moses H. Cone Memorial Park
Mount Pisgah
Waterrock Knob)
National Trails
Appalachian Trail
Overmountain Victory National Historic Trail
National Seashores
Cape Hatteras
Cape Lookout
National Marine Sanctuary
Monitor
National Estuarine
Research Reserve
Currituck Banks
Rachel Carson
Masonboro Island
Zeke’s Island
National Forests
Cherokee
Croatan
Nantahala
Pisgah
Uwharrie
National Wildlife Refuges
Alligator River
Cedar Island
Currituck
Mackay Island
Mattamuskeet
Pea Island
Pee Dee
Pocosin Lakes
Roanoke River
Swanquarter
Wilderness Areas
Birkhead Mountains
Catfish Lake South
Ellicott Rock
Joyce Kilmer-Slickrock
Linville Gorge
Middle Prong
Pocosin
Pond Pine
Sheep Ridge
Shining Rock
Southern Nantahala
Swanquarter
Wilderness Study Areas
Craggy Mountain
Harper Creek
Lost Cove
Overflow
Snowbird
Wild and Scenic Rivers
Chattooga River
Horsepasture River
Lumber River
New River
Wilson Creek
State
State Parks
Carolina Beach
Carvers Creek
Chimney Rock
Cliffs of the Neuse
Crowders Mountain
Dismal Swamp
Elk Knob
Eno River
Fort Macon
Goose Creek
Gorges
Grandfather Mountain
Hammocks Beach
Hanging Rock
Haw River
Jockey's Ridge
Jones Lake
Lake James
Lake Norman
Lake Waccamaw
Lumber River
Mayo River
Medoc Mountain
Merchants Millpond
Morrow Mountain
Mount Mitchell
New River
Pettigrew
Pilot Mountain
Raven Rock
Singletary Lake
South Mountains
Stone Mountain
William B. Umstead
State Recreation Areas
Falls Lake
Fort Fisher
Jordan Lake
Kerr Lake
State Natural Areas
Hemlock Bluffs
Masonboro Island
Mount Jefferson
Occoneechee Mountain
Theodore Roosevelt
Weymouth Woods
See also List of North Carolina State Natural Areas
State Lakes
Bay Tree Lake
Jones Lake
Lake Phelps
Salters Lake
Singletary Lake
Lake Waccamaw
White Lake
State Trails
Deep River
French Broad River
Mountains-to-Sea
Yadkin River
State Rivers
Horsepasture River
Linville River
Lumber River
New River
State Forests
Bladen Lakes
DuPont
Clemmons
Holmes
Jordan Lake
Mountain Island
Rendezvous Mountain
Turnbull Creek
Tuttle
State Historic Sites
Alamance Battleground
Charles B. Aycock Birthplace
Historic Bath
Bennett Place
Bentonville Battleground
Brunswick Town / Fort Anderson
C.S.S. Neuse and Governor Caswell Memorial
Charlotte Hawkins Brown Memorial
Duke Homestead
Historic Edenton
Fort Dobbs
Fort Fisher
Historic Halifax
Horne Creek Living Historical Farm
House in the Horseshoe
North Carolina Transportation Museum
President James K. Polk Historic Site
Reed Gold Mine
Somerset Place
Stagville
State Capitol
Town Creek Indian Mound
Tryon Palace Historic Sites &amp; Gardens
Zebulon B. Vance Birthplace
Thomas Wolfe Memorial
NC Coastal Reserve
Kitty Hawk Woods
Emily and Richardson Preyer Buckridge
Buxton Woods
Permuda Island
Bald Head Woods
Bird Island
Other
Nature centers
List of nature centers in North Carolina
v
t
e
Protected areas of Tennessee
Federal
National Parks
Great Smoky Mountains National Park
National Historical
Parks &amp; Sites
Andrew Johnson National Historic Site
Cumberland Gap National Historical Park
Manhattan Project National Historical Park
National Military Parks
Chickamauga and Chattanooga National Military Park
Fort Donelson National Battlefield
Fort Donelson National Cemetery
Shiloh National Cemetery
Shiloh National Military Park
Stones River National Battlefield
Stones River National Cemetery
National Recreation Areas
Big South Fork National River and Recreation Area
Land Between the Lakes National Recreation Area
National Trails System
Appalachian National Scenic Trail
Natchez Trace National Scenic Trail
Overmountain Victory National Historic Trail
Trail of Tears National Historic Trail
National Forests
Cherokee National Forest
National Wildlife Refuges
Chickasaw
Cross Creeks
Hatchie
Lake Isom
Lower Hatchie
Reelfoot
Tennessee
Wilderness Areas
Bald River Gorge
Big Frog
Big Laurel Branch
Citico Creek
Cohutta
Gee Creek
Joyce Kilmer-Slickrock
Little Frog Mountain
Pond Mountain
Sampson Mountain
Unaka Mountain
Other Protected Areas
Foothills Parkway
Gatlinburg Bypass
Natchez Trace Parkway
Obed Wild and Scenic River
State
East Tennessee
State Parks
Big Ridge
Booker T. Washington
Cove Lake
Cumberland Mountain
Davy Crockett Birthplace
Fall Creek Falls
Fort Loudoun
Frozen Head
Harrison Bay
Hiwassee/Ocoee
Indian Mountain
Justin P. Wilson Cumberland Trail
Norris Dam
Panther Creek
Red Clay
Roan Mountain
Rocky Fork
Seven Islands
Sycamore Shoals
Warriors' Path
Middle Tennessee
State Parks
Bicentennial Capitol Mall
Bledsoe Creek
Burgess Falls
Cedars Of Lebanon
Cordell Hull Birthplace
Cummins Falls
David Crockett
Dunbar Cave
Edgar Evins
Fall Creek Falls
Harpeth River
Henry Horton
Johnsonville
Long Hunter
Montgomery Bell
Mousetail Landing
Old Stone Fort
Pickett
Port Royal
Radnor Lake
Rock Island
Sgt. Alvin C. York
South Cumberland
Standing Stone
Tims Ford
West Tennessee
State Parks
Big Cypress Tree
Big Hill Pond
Chickasaw
Fort Pillow
Meeman-Shelby Forest
Nathan Bedford Forrest
Natchez Trace
Paris Landing
Pickwick Landing
Pinson Mounds
Reelfoot Lake
T.O. Fuller
State Forests
Bledsoe
Cedars of Lebanon
Chickasaw
Chuck Swan
Franklin
Lewis
Lone Mountain
Martha Sundquist
Natchez Trace
Pickett
Prentice Cooper
Scott
Standing Stone
Stewart
State Natural Areas
Bays Mountain
Big Bone Cave
Colditz Cove
Honey Creek
House Mountain
Piney Falls
Laurel-Snow
North Chickamauga Creek Gorge
Ozone Falls
Stillhouse Hollow Falls
Stinging Fork Falls
Virgin Falls
Other
Other
Catoosa Wildlife Management Area
Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation (web) - Tennessee Department of Agriculture (web)
v
t
e
World Heritage Sites in the United States
Northeast
Independence Hall
Statue of Liberty
Midwest
Cahokia
South
Everglades
Great Smoky Mountains
Mammoth Cave
Monticello and the University of Virginia
Poverty Point
San Antonio Missions
West
Carlsbad Caverns
Chaco Culture National Historical Park
Grand Canyon National Park
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park
Kluane-Wrangell–St. Elias-Glacier Bay-Tatshenshini-Alsek1
Mesa Verde
Olympic National Park
Pueblo de Taos
Papahānaumokuākea
Redwood
Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park1
Yellowstone National Park
Yosemite National Park
Territories
La Fortaleza and San Juan National Historic Site
1 Shared with Canada
Authority control
VIAF: 136349242
GND: 4477623-8
SUDOC: 070451710
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Great_Smoky_Mountains_National_Park&amp;oldid=704097048"					
				Categories: IUCN Category IIGreat Smoky Mountains National ParkGreat Smoky MountainsBiosphere reserves of the United StatesBlue Ridge National Heritage AreaCivilian Conservation Corps in North CarolinaCivilian Conservation Corps in TennesseeNorth Carolina outdoor recreationOld growth forestsProtected areas established in 1934Protected areas of Blount County, TennesseeProtected areas of Cocke County, TennesseeProtected areas of Haywood County, North CarolinaProtected areas of Sevier County, TennesseeProtected areas of Swain County, North CarolinaSouthern SixersWorks Progress Administration in TennesseeWorks Progress Administration in North CarolinaNational Park Service areas in TennesseeWorld Heritage Sites in the United StatesGatlinburg, TennesseeHidden categories: Coordinates on WikidataArticles which use infobox templates with no data rowsCommons category with page title same as on WikidataWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
			Navigation menu
						Personal tools
							Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in						
						Namespaces
															Article
															Talk
							Variants
						Views
															Read
															Edit
															View history
						More
							Search
			Navigation
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
			Interaction
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
			Tools
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
			Print/export
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
			Languages
						العربيةCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançais한국어HrvatskiItalianoעבריתქართულიҚазақшаLatviešuLietuviųമലയാളംNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSimple EnglishSlovenčinaSuomiSvenskaTürkçeTiếng ViệtWinaray中文					
				Edit links			
											 This page was last modified on 9 February 2016, at 14:47.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											Cookie statement
											Mobile view

