Haleakalā National Park - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Location within Hawaii
Location
Maui County, Hawaii, United States
Nearestcity
Pukalani
Coordinates
20°43′0″N 156°10′0″W﻿ / ﻿20.71667°N 156.16667°W﻿ / 20.71667; -156.16667Coordinates: 20°43′0″N 156°10′0″W﻿ / ﻿20.71667°N 156.16667°W﻿ / 20.71667; -156.16667
Area
33,265 acres (13,462ha)[1]
Established
July 1, 1961
Visitors
1,142,040 (in2014)[2]
Governingbody
National Park Service
Location of Haleakalā National Park in the southeastern part of Maui Island
Detail map of Haleakalā National Park
Haleakalā National Park is a national park located on the island of Maui in the U.S. state of Hawaiʻi. The park covers an area of 33,265 acres (134.62km2),[1] of which 19,270 acres (77.98km2) is a wilderness area.[3]
Contents
1 History
2 Summit
3 Kipahulu
4 Flora and fauna
5 Haleakala Observatory
6 See also
7 References
8 External links
History[edit]
It was originally created as part of the Hawaii National Park along with the volcanoes of Mauna Loa and Kilauea on the island of Hawaiʻi in 1916. Hawaii Volcanoes National Park was made into a separate national park in 1961. The park area was designated an International Biosphere Reserve in 1980.[4] The name Haleakalā is Hawaiian for "house of the sun." According to a local legend, the semigod Maui imprisoned the sun here in order to lengthen the day.[5] The Hawaiian National Park Language Correction Act of 2000 was proposed to observe the Hawaiian spelling, but it did not become law.[6]
The park features the dormant Haleakalā (East Maui) Volcano, which last erupted sometime between 1480 and 1600 AD.[7] The park is divided into two distinct sections: the summit area and the coastal Kipahulu area.
The two sections of the park average 1,450,000 visitors per year.
Summit[edit]
Visitor center view at 9,740 feet (2,970m)
An extremely winding but well maintained road leads up the mountain. The summit area includes Haleakalā Crater, the summit of the volcano, and the area surrounding the summit. This part of the park is accessed by Hawaii state road 378. There is a visitor center, with parking and restrooms, near the summit. At the summit itself is another parking lot and a simple observatory without facilities.
The main feature of this part of the park is undoubtedly the famous Haleakalā Crater. It is huge: 6.99 miles (11.25km) across, 2.0mi (3.2km) wide, and some 2,600ft (790m) deep. The interior of the crater is dotted by numerous volcanic features, including large cinder cones. Two main trails lead into the crater from the summit area: the Halemau'u and Sliding Sands trails. Hikers in the crater can stay in one of three cabins (which need to be reserved through the park first).
Each morning, visitors come to the summit of the volcano to watch the spectacular sunrise. More visitors come each afternoon to watch the equally amazing sunset. In either case conditions can be extremely cold. One attraction of the park is Hosmer's Grove, a unique forest of alien trees including deodar (Cedrus deodara) from the Himalayas, sugi (Cryptomeria japonica) from Japan, eucalyptus from Australia, and several species from North America (pine, spruce, cypress, fir, and others). Native plants and trees are also present in the forest but are not very common due to the little light available (because of the taller alien trees).
The park is known for its unique volcanic features, its long scenic drive with numerous overlooks, and the unusually clear views of the night sky available. Haleakalā is one of the best places in the United States for amateur astronomy, and binoculars and telescopes are available for rent from many local merchants. Nēnē (Hawaiian geese, Branta sandvicensis) can also be seen in their natural habitat in Haleakalā Crater. Although nēnē died out entirely in the park, in 1946 they were re-introduced with the help of the Boy Scouts, who carried young birds into the crater in their backpacks.[8]
Kipahulu[edit]
Swimmers in the pools at Kipahulu
Kipahulu region, Haleakalā National Park
The second section of the park is the Kipahulu section. Visitors cannot drive directly to this section from the summit area; they must take a winding coastal road that travels around the windward coast of the island. This part of the park lies within the lower part of Kipahulu Valley. It is separated from the summit area of the park by the upper portion of the valley. This area is designated the Kipahulu Valley Biological Reserve and is closed to the public to preserve the native plant and animal species in this fragile rainforest.
This section of the park features more than two dozen pools along Palikea Stream in the gulch called ʻOheʻo. These pools contain rare native freshwater fish. Visitors may choose to swim in these pools, or they may choose to hike a trail that takes visitors up to the base of Waimoku Falls.
Flora and fauna[edit]
Because it is on a volcanic area, all of the plants and animals that are now present on the island were brought through pioneers or naturally (two thousand miles through the air or sea). Once the organisms got there, they went under strange adaptations to make the species unique. More endangered species live in Haleakalā National Park than any other national park in the United States.[9] Once traveling to this part of the island became more frequent, native species were destroyed. One example is the ʻāhinahina (Haleakalā silversword, Argyroxiphium sandwicense macrocephalum), which used to cover Haleakala Mountain to a degree where the mountain looked as if it were covered with snow.[10] Other endangered species include the endangered Haleakalā schiedea (Schiedea haleakalensis).[11]
Haleakala Observatory[edit]
Haleakala Observatory viewed from the Haleakala visitor center
Haleakala Observatory is an important observation site located near the visitor center. It is above the tropical inversion layer thus experiencing excellent viewing conditions and very clear skies. For over 40 years, the University of Hawaii Institute for Astronomy has managed this site, conducting dedicated astrophysical experiments. Due to the aforementioned location of the observatory, most of these programs could not be accomplished anywhere else in the world. One of its missions, the Maui Space Surveillance System (MSSS), is to track satellites and debris orbiting the Earth. The buildings are on a gated road just past the summit.[12]
See also[edit]
Haleakala Wilderness
References[edit]
^ a b "Listing of acreage as of December 31, 2011". Land Resource Division, National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-07.
^ "NPS Annual Recreation Visits Report". National Park Service. Retrieved 2015-06-28.
^ "The National Parks: Index 2009–2011". National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-07.
^ "Biosphere Reserve Information: United States of America: Hawaiian Islands". United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. Retrieved 2009-12-02.
^ Westervelt, WD (1910). "Legends of Maui: A Demi-God of Polynesia and His Mother Hina". sacred-texts.com. Retrieved 2012-03-14.
^ Hawaiian National Park Language Correction Act of 2000 (S.939)
^ "Youngest lava flows on East Maui probably older than A.D. 1790". 1999-10-04. Retrieved 2012-03-14.
^ Hurley, Timothy (2002-07-13). "Maui's Boy Scouts mark 40-year link to nene". Honolulu Advertiser. Retrieved 2012-03-14.
^ "Issues". Friends of Haleakala National Park. Retrieved 2009-03-07.
^ "Silverswords of Hawaii". Hawaii Guide. Retrieved 2012-03-14.
^ Shiedea haleakalensis. The Nature Conservancy.
^ Maui Space Surveillance Site (MSSS)
External links[edit]
Find more about
Haleakalā National Park
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from Commons
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
"Haleakalā National Park". Geographic Names Information System. United States Geological Survey. Retrieved 2011-08-19.
Official Haleakalā National Park website
Friends of Haleakala National Park — nonprofit organization
Haleakalā Biosphere Reserve — information.
East Maui Watershed Partnership
Kipahulu Ohana — nonprofit organization for cultural interpretation + restoration in Kipahulu district of Haleakala National Park.
Historic American Engineering Record (HAER) No.HI-52, "Haleakala National Park Roads, Pukalani, Maui County, HI", 177photos, 4color transparencies, 106data pages, 22photo caption pages
v
t
e
Hawaiian volcanism topics (list)
Windward
Isles
Lōʻihi
Māhukona
Hawaiʻi
Kīlauea (Kīlauea Iki, Puʻu ʻŌʻō)
Mauna Loa
Hualālai
Mauna Kea
Kohala
Kahoʻolawe
Kauaʻi
Kaʻula
Lānaʻi
Maui
Haleakalā
West Maui
Molokaʻi
Penguin Bank
West Molokai Volcano
East Molokai Volcano
Niʻihau
Oʻahu
Kaʻena
Koʻolau
Waiʻanae
Leeward
Isles
French Frigate Shoals
Gardner Pinnacles
Kure Atoll
Laysan
Lisianski Island
Maro Reef
Midway Atoll
Necker Island
Nihoa
Pearl and Hermes Atoll
Emperor
Seamounts
Abbott
Colahan
Daikakuji
Detroit
Hancock
Jingu
Kammu
Kimmei
Koko
Meiji
Nintoku
Ojin
Suiko
Yomei
Yuryaku
Topics
1955 Hawaiian submarine eruption
ʻAʻā (lava)
Evolution of Hawaiian volcanoes
Haleakalā National Park
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park
Hawaiian–Emperor seamount chain
Hawaiian eruption
Hawaiian Volcano Observatory
Lava fountain
Limu o Pele
Pāhoehoe (lava)
Pele's hair
Pele's tears
v
t
e
Protected areas of Hawaii
Federal
National Parks
Haleakalā
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes
National Historical Parks &amp; Sites
Kalaupapa NHP
Kaloko-Honokōhau NHP
Puʻukoholā Heiau NHS
Puʻuhonua o Hōnaunau NHP
National Monuments
Papahānaumokuākea Marine
World War II Valor in the Pacific
National Marine Sanctuary
Hawaiian Islands Humpback Whale
National Wildlife Refuges
Hakalau Forest
Hanalei
Hawaiian Islands
Huleia
James Campbell
Kakahaia
Kealia Pond
Kilauea Point
Kona Forest
Oahu Forest
Wilderness Areas
Haleakala
Hawaii Volcanoes
State Parks,
Monuments
Recreation Areas
and Preserves
Hawaiʻi (island)
Akaka Falls State Park
Hapuna Beach State Recreation Area
Hulihee Palace
Kalopa State Recreation Area
Kealakekua Bay State Historical Park
Kohala Historical Sites State Monument
Kona Coast (Kekaha Kai) State Park
Kīholo State Park Reserve
Lapakahi State Historical Park
Lava Tree State Monument
MacKenzie State Recreation Area
Manuka State Wayside
Mauna Kea Ice Age Reserve
Mauna Kea State Recreation Area
Old Kona Airport State Recreation Area
Wailoa River State Recreation Area
Wailuku River State Park
Kaua‘i
Ahukini State Recreation Pier
Ha'ena State Park
Koke'e State Park
Nā Pali Coast State Park
Polihale State Park
Russian Fort Elizabeth State Historical Park
Wailua River State Park
Waimea Canyon State Park
Waimea State Recreational Pier
Maui
Haleki'i-Pihana Heiau State Monument
ʻĪao Valley State Monument
Kaumahina State Wayside Park
Makena State Park
Polipoli Spring State Recreation Area
Pua'a Ka'a State Wayside Park
Wai'anapanapa State Park
Wailua Valley State Wayside Park
Moloka‘i
Pala'au State Park
O‘ahu
Ahupua'a O Kahana State Park
'Aiea Bay State Recreation Area
Diamond Head State Monument
Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve
He‘eia State Park
‘Iolani Palace State Monument
Ka'ena Point State Park
Kaiwi State Scenic Shoreline
Kaka'ako Waterfront Park
Kea'iwa Heiau State Recreation Area
Kewalo Basin
Kukaniloko Birthstones State Monument
La'ie Point State Wayside
Makapu‘u Point State Wayside
Malaekahana State Recreation Area
Nu'uanu Pali State Wayside
Pu'u o Mahuka Heiau State Monument
Pu'u 'Ualaka'a State Wayside
Queen Emma Summer Palace
Royal Mausoleum State Monument
Sacred Falls State Park
Sand Island State Recreation Area
Ulupo Heiau State Historic Site
Wa'ahila Ridge State Recreation Area
Wahiawa Freshwater State Recreation Area
Hawai'i Department of Land and Natural Resources
v
t
e
National parks of the United States
Acadia
American Samoa
Arches
Badlands
Big Bend
Biscayne
Black Canyon of the Gunnison
Bryce Canyon
Canyonlands
Capitol Reef
Carlsbad Caverns
Channel Islands
Congaree
Crater Lake
Cuyahoga Valley
Death Valley
Denali
Dry Tortugas
Everglades
Gates of the Arctic
Glacier
Glacier Bay
Grand Canyon
Grand Teton
Great Basin
Great Sand Dunes
Great Smoky Mountains
Guadalupe Mountains
Haleakalā
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes
Hot Springs
Isle Royale
Joshua Tree
Katmai
Kenai Fjords
Kings Canyon
Kobuk Valley
Lake Clark
Lassen Volcanic
Mammoth Cave
Mesa Verde
Mount Rainier
North Cascades
Olympic
Petrified Forest
Pinnacles
Redwood
Rocky Mountain
Saguaro
Sequoia
Shenandoah
Theodore Roosevelt
Virgin Islands
Voyageurs
Wind Cave
Wrangell–St. Elias
Yellowstone
Yosemite
Zion
List of national parks of the United States (by elevation)
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Haleakalā_National_Park&amp;oldid=702086950"					
				Categories: IUCN Category IIHaleakalā National ParkProtected areas of MauiProtected areas established in 1916Parks in Hawaii1916 establishments in HawaiiHidden categories: Coordinates on Wikidata				
			Navigation menu
						Personal tools
							Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in						
						Namespaces
															Article
															Talk
							Variants
						Views
															Read
															Edit
															View history
						More
							Search
			Navigation
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
			Interaction
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
			Tools
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
			Print/export
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
			Languages
						العربيةAzərbaycancaБългарскиCatalàDanskDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançaisHrvatskiNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålپنجابیPolskiPortuguêsРусскийSuomiSvenskaTürkçeTiếng Việt中文					
				Edit links			
											 This page was last modified on 28 January 2016, at 10:06.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Mobile view
											Developers
											Cookie statement

