Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Pāhoehoe Lava and ʻAʻā flows
Location
Hawaii County, Hawaii, USA
Nearestcity
Hilo
Coordinates
19°23′0″N 155°12′0″W﻿ / ﻿19.38333°N 155.20000°W﻿ / 19.38333; -155.20000Coordinates: 19°23′0″N 155°12′0″W﻿ / ﻿19.38333°N 155.20000°W﻿ / 19.38333; -155.20000
Area
323,431 acres (130,888ha)[1]
Established
August 1, 1916
Visitors
1,693,005 (in2014)[2]
Governingbody
National Park Service
UNESCO World Heritage Site
Official name
Hawaii Volcanoes National Park
Type
Natural
Criteria
viii
Designated
1987 (11th session)
Referenceno.
409
State Party
United States
Region
Europe and North America
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park, established in 1916, is a United States National Park located in the U.S. State of Hawaii on the island of Hawaii. It encompasses two active volcanoes: Kīlauea, one of the world's most active volcanoes, and Mauna Loa, the world's most massive subaerial volcano. The park gives scientists insight into the birth of the Hawaiian Islands and ongoing studies into the processes of vulcanism. For visitors, the park offers dramatic volcanic landscapes as well as glimpses of rare flora and fauna.
In recognition of its outstanding natural values, Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park was designated as an International Biosphere Reserve in 1980 and a World Heritage Site in 1987.[3] In 2012 the Hawai'i Volcanoes National Park was honored on the 14th quarter of the America the Beautiful Quarters series.
Contents
1 Environment
2 History
2.1 Historic places
3 Visitor center and museums
4 Painting of Pele
5 Recent events
6 See also
7 References
8 External links
Environment[edit]
The park includes 323,431 acres (505.36sqmi; 1,308.88km2) of land.[4] Over half of the park is designated the Hawaii Volcanoes Wilderness area and provides unusual hiking and camping opportunities. The park encompasses diverse environments that range from sea level to the summit of the Earth's most massive active volcano, Mauna Loa at 13,677 feet (4,169m). Climates range from lush tropical rain forests, to the arid and barren Kaʻū Desert.
Active eruptive sites include the main caldera of Kīlauea and a more active but remote vent called Puʻu ʻŌʻō.[5]
The main entrance to the park is from the Hawaii Belt Road. The Chain of Craters Road, as the name implies, leads past several craters from historic eruptions to the coast. It used to continue to another entrance to the park near the town of Kalapana, but that portion is now covered by a lava flow.
History[edit]
Kīlauea and its Halemaʻumaʻu caldera were traditionally considered the sacred home of the volcano goddess Pele, and Hawaiians visited the crater to offer gifts to the goddess. In 1790, a party of warriors (along with women and children who were in the area) were caught in an unusually violent eruption. Many were killed and others left footprints in the lava that can still be seen today.[6]
The first western visitors to the site, English missionary William Ellis and American Asa Thurston, went to Kīlauea in 1823. Ellis wrote of his reaction to the first sight of the erupting volcano:
A spectacle, sublime and even appalling, presented itself before us. 'We stopped and trembled.' Astonishment and awe for some moments rendered us mute, and, like statues, we stood fixed to the spot, with our eyes riveted on the abyss below.[7]
The volcano became a tourist attraction in the 1840s, and local businessmen such as Benjamin Pitman and George Lycurgus ran a series of hotels at the rim.[8] Volcano House is the only hotel or restaurant located within the borders of the National Park.
Lorrin A. Thurston, grandson of the American missionary Asa Thurston, was one of the driving forces behind the establishment of the park after investing in the hotel from 1891 to 1904. William R. Castle first proposed the idea in 1903. Thurston, who then owned the Honolulu Advertiser newspaper, printed editorials in favor of the park idea. In 1907, the territory of Hawaii paid for fifty members of Congress and their wives to visit Haleakala and Kīlauea. It included a dinner cooked over lava steam vents. In 1908 Thurston entertained Secretary of the Interior James Rudolph Garfield, and in 1909 another congressional delegation. Governor Walter F. Frear proposed a draft bill in 1911 to create "Kilauea National Park" for $50,000. Thurston and local landowner William Herbert Shipman proposed boundaries, but ran into some opposition from ranchers. Thurston printed endorsements from John Muir, Henry Cabot Lodge, and former President Theodore Roosevelt.[9] After several attempts, the legislation introduced by delegate Jonah Kūhiō Kalaniana'ole finally passed to create the park. House Resolution 9525 was signed by Woodrow Wilson on August 1, 1916. It was the 11th National Park in the United States, and the first in a Territory.[10]
Within a few weeks, the National Park Service Organic Act would create the National Park Service to run the system.[11] Originally called "Hawaii National Park", it was split from the Haleakalā National Park on September 22, 1960.
An easily accessible lava tube was named for the Thurston family. An undeveloped stretch of the Thurston Lava Tube extends an additional 1,100ft (340m) beyond the developed area and dead-ends into the hillside. Though it is blocked by a chain link fence to keep unwary visitors from entering, the easily traversed stretch is in fact open to the public and accessible through a gate in the fence.
Park map including Kahuku on left
In 2004, an additional 115,788 acres (468.58km2) of Kahuku Ranch were added to the park, making it 56% larger. This was an area west of the town of Waiʻōhinu and east of Ocean View, the largest land acquisition in Hawaii's history. The land was bought for US$21.9 million from the Samuel Mills Damon Estate, with financing from the Nature Conservancy.[4]
Geologic History: Hawaii Volcanoes National Park is located on the island of Hawaii, at the young end of the 1700-mile stretch of islands. The islands are fairly young, from less than 1 million years at the youngest to nearly 6 million at the oldest; new formations continue to be formed today. The islands are located on the top of the Pacific plate, the largest tectonic plate on earth. Due to sea floor spreading, the plate continues to expand which has directly influenced the growth of the islands. The two main active volcanoes in the Hawaii Volcanoes National Park are Mauna Loa and Kilauea. Mauna Loa has an elevation of 13,680 feet (4,170m) and a 70-mile (110km) long, 30-mile (48km) wide shield-shaped dome. It is the world's largest active volcano, encompassing 10,000 cubic miles.[12] Similarly, Kilauea also has a shield shaped dome, which is 50 miles (80km) long and 14 miles (23km) wide. Both volcanoes release more fluid and less gaseous eruptions, which produce “fiery fountains and rivers of molten lava”,[12] Due to these eruptions, a desert-like volcanic landscape has resulted amidst the National Park.
Specifically, Mauna Loa has come to be the largest mountain on earth because of the multiple formations that took place during the Pleistocene Epoch. The Ninole Formation, which has left the oldest exposed lavas make up the core of the mountain. As a result, there are deep canyons that were made by lavas during the erosional period preceding the Kahuki Formation . During this second stage of formations, lava partially filled the canyons and built up the slopes of Mauna Loa. The third formation, Ka’u, created younger lavas that covered the older lavas. Through these three formation periods, Mauna Loa reached its current height at the end of the Pleistocene Epoch.
The development of the Hawaii islands is due to the five shield volcanoes that erupted during the Pleistocene Period. They are part of a volcanic chain located along the crest of the Hawaiian-Emperor seamount chain. Similarly, glaciation and changes in sea level have affected the geologic formation of the Volcanoes in the National Park. A small icecap that once existed on the volcano of Mauna Kea during the Pleistocene Epoch that resulted in glaciers, and has led to snow falls on both Mauna Kea and Mauna Loa volcanoes. Additionally, changes in the sea level have resulted in land submergence and shorelines decreasing.
Tree on fire near Royal Gardens subdivision in late January 2007
Historic places[edit]
Several of the National Register of Historic Places listings on the island of Hawaii are located within the park:
1790 Footprints
Ainahou Ranch
Ainapo Trail
Kilauea Crater
Puna-Ka'u Historic District
Volcano House
Whitney Seismograph Vault No. 29
Wilkes Campsite
Visitor center and museums[edit]
Jaggar Museum
The main visitor center, located just within the park entrance at 19°25′46″N 155°15′25.5″W﻿ / ﻿19.42944°N 155.257083°W﻿ / 19.42944; -155.257083, includes displays and information about the features of the park.
The nearby Volcano Art Center, located in the original 1877 Volcano House hotel, is listed on the National Register of Historic Places and now houses historical displays and an art gallery.
The Thomas A. Jaggar Museum, located a few miles west on Crater Rim Drive, features more exhibits and a close view of the Kīlauea's active vent Halemaʻumaʻu. The museum is named after scientist Thomas Jaggar, the first director of the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory, which adjoins the museum. The observatory itself is operated by the U.S. Geological Survey and is not open to the public. Bookstores are located in the main visitor center and the Jaggar Museum.[13]
The Kilauea Military Camp provides accommodations for U.S. military personnel.[14]
As of 2008[update] the superintendent was Cindy Orlando.[4] Volunteer groups also sponsor events in the park.[15]
Painting of Pele[edit]
About 1929, D. Howard Hitchcock made an oil painting of Pele, the Hawaiian goddess of fire, lightning, wind, and volcanoes. In 1966, the artist's son, Harvey, donated the painting to the Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park, where it was displayed in the visitors' center from 1966 to 2005.[16] The painting was criticized for portraying the Hawaiian goddess as a Caucasian.[16]
Arthur Johnsen's Pele
In 2003, the Volcano Art Center announced a competition for a "more modern and culturally authentic rendering" of the goddess.[17] An anonymous judging panel of Native Hawaiian elders selected a painting by Arthur Johnsen of Pahoa, Hawaii from 140 entries. In Johnsen's painting, the goddess has distinctly Polynesian features. She is holding a digging stick (ʻōʻō) in her left hand and the egg that gave birth to her younger sister Hiʻiaka in her right hand.[17] In 2005, the Hitchcock was replaced with Johnsen's painting.
Recent events[edit]
Lava erupting from the Puʻu ʻŌʻō vent
For more details on this topic, see Halema`uma`u crater.
On March 19, 2008, there was a small explosion in Halemaʻumaʻu crater, the first explosive event since 1924 and the first eruption in the Kīlauea caldera since September 1982. Debris from the explosion was scattered over an area of 74 acres (300,000m2). A small amount of ash was also reported at a nearby community. The explosion covered part of Crater Rim Drive and damaged Halemaʻumaʻu Overlook. The explosion did not release any lava, which suggests to scientists that it was driven by hydrothermal or gas sources.[18]
This explosion event followed the opening of a major sulfur dioxide gas vent, greatly increasing levels emitted from the Halemaʻumaʻu crater. The dangerous increase of sulfur dioxide gas has prompted closures of Crater Rim Drive between the Jaggar Museum south/southeast to Chain of Craters Road, Crater Rim Trail from Kīlauea Military Camp south/southeast to Chain of Craters Road, and all trails leading to Halemaʻumaʻu crater, including those from Byron Ledge, ʻIliahi (Sandalwood) Trail, and Kaʻū Desert Trail.[19]
See also[edit]
Devastation Trail
References[edit]
^ "Listing of acreage as of December 31, 2011". Land Resource Division, National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-07.
^ "NPS Annual Recreation Visits Report". National Park Service. Retrieved 2015-06-28.
^ "Hawai'i's Only World Heritage Site". Hawai'i Volcanoes National Park web site. National Park Service. Retrieved 2009-12-02.
^ a b c "2008 Business Plan" (PDF). Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. National Park Service. Retrieved 2009-12-02.
^ "Kilauea Status Page". HVO. USGS.
^ Nakamura, Jadelyn (2003). "Keonehelelei – the falling sands" (PDF). Hawaii Volcanoes National Park Archaeological Inventory of the Footprints Area.
^ "Early Kilauea Explorations". Hawaii Nature Notes number 2. National Park Service. November 1953. Retrieved 2000-12-01. Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ "The Volcano House". Hawaii Nature Notes number 2. National Park Service. November 1953. Retrieved 2000-12-01. Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ "The Park Idea". Hawaii Nature Notes number 2. National Park Service. November 1953. Retrieved 2000-12-01. Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ "The Final Thrust". Hawaii Nature Notes number 2. National Park Service. November 1953. Retrieved 2000-12-01. Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ "The National Park Service Organic Act". statutes of the 64th United States Congress. National Park Service. August 25, 1916. Retrieved 2000-12-01. Check date values in: |access-date= (help)
^ a b "Hawaii Volcanoes National Park". Geology Field Notes. National Park Service.
^ "Hawai'i Natural History Association". official web site. Retrieved 2009-12-02.
^ "Kilauea Military Camp at Kilauea Volcano, a Joint Services Recreation Center". official web site. Retrieved 2009-12-02.
^ "Friends of Hawai'i Volcanoes National Park". official web site. Retrieved 2009-12-02.
^ a b Rod Thompson (July 13, 2003). "Rendering Pele: Artists gather paints and canvas in effort to be chosen as Pele's portrait maker". Honolulu Star-Bulletin. Retrieved 2010-01-08.
^ a b Thompson, Rod (August 15, 2003). "Winning Vision of Pele, an Unusual Take". Honolulu Star Bulletin. p.A3.
^ "Explosive eruption in Halemaʻumaʻu Crater, Kilauea Volcano". HVO. USGS. Archived from the original on 2008-03-23.
^ "Closed Areas". Hawai'i Volcanoes National Park web site. National Park Service. Retrieved 2009-12-02.
External links[edit]
Find more about
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from Commons
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
"Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park". Geographic Names Information System. United States Geological Survey. Retrieved 2011-08-21.
Official Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park website
Volcano Gallery: Hawaii Volcanoes National Park - Local Info Photo Gallery, Volcano Live Cam, Eruption Update and General Park Information.
Historic American Engineering Record (HAER) No.HI-47, "Hawaii Volcanoes National Park Roads, Volcano, Hawaii County, HI", 6photos, 20measured drawings, 116data pages, 1photo caption page
HAER No.HI-76, "Hawaii Volcanoes National Park Water Collection System, Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, Volcano, Hawaii County, HI", 51photos, 40measured drawings, 43data pages, 5photo caption pages
HAER No.HI-48, "Crater Rim Drive, Volcano, Hawaii County, HI", 17photos, 1color transparency, 3data pages, 3photo caption pages
HAER No.HI-48, "Chain of Craters Road, Volcano, Hawaii County, HI", 7photos, 1color transparency, 3data pages, 2photo caption pages
HAER No.HI-50, "Mauna Loa Road, Volcano, Hawaii County, HI", 13photos, 1color transparency, 3data pages, 2photo caption pages
HAER No.HI-51, "Hilina Pali Road, Volcano, Hawaii County, HI", 8photos, 1color transparency, 3data pages, 2photo caption pages
Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS) No.HI-523, "Namakani Paio Campground, Highway 11, Volcano, Hawaii County, HI", 6photos, 4data pages, 1photo caption page
v
t
e
Hawaiian volcanism topics (list)
Windward
Isles
Lōʻihi
Māhukona
Hawaiʻi
Kīlauea (Kīlauea Iki, Puʻu ʻŌʻō)
Mauna Loa
Hualālai
Mauna Kea
Kohala
Kahoʻolawe
Kauaʻi
Kaʻula
Lānaʻi
Maui
Haleakalā
West Maui
Molokaʻi
Penguin Bank
West Molokai Volcano
East Molokai Volcano
Niʻihau
Oʻahu
Kaʻena
Koʻolau
Waiʻanae
Leeward
Isles
French Frigate Shoals
Gardner Pinnacles
Kure Atoll
Laysan
Lisianski Island
Maro Reef
Midway Atoll
Necker Island
Nihoa
Pearl and Hermes Atoll
Emperor
Seamounts
Abbott
Colahan
Daikakuji
Detroit
Hancock
Jingu
Kammu
Kimmei
Koko
Meiji
Nintoku
Ojin
Suiko
Yomei
Yuryaku
Topics
1955 Hawaiian submarine eruption
ʻAʻā (lava)
Evolution of Hawaiian volcanoes
Haleakalā National Park
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park
Hawaiian–Emperor seamount chain
Hawaiian eruption
Hawaiian Volcano Observatory
Lava fountain
Limu o Pele
Pāhoehoe (lava)
Pele's hair
Pele's tears
v
t
e
Protected areas of Hawaii
Federal
National Parks
Haleakalā
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes
National Historical Parks &amp; Sites
Kalaupapa NHP
Kaloko-Honokōhau NHP
Puʻukoholā Heiau NHS
Puʻuhonua o Hōnaunau NHP
National Monuments
Papahānaumokuākea Marine
World War II Valor in the Pacific
National Marine Sanctuary
Hawaiian Islands Humpback Whale
National Wildlife Refuges
Hakalau Forest
Hanalei
Hawaiian Islands
Huleia
James Campbell
Kakahaia
Kealia Pond
Kilauea Point
Kona Forest
Oahu Forest
Wilderness Areas
Haleakala
Hawaii Volcanoes
State Parks,
Monuments
Recreation Areas
and Preserves
Hawaiʻi (island)
Akaka Falls State Park
Hapuna Beach State Recreation Area
Hulihee Palace
Kalopa State Recreation Area
Kealakekua Bay State Historical Park
Kohala Historical Sites State Monument
Kona Coast (Kekaha Kai) State Park
Kīholo State Park Reserve
Lapakahi State Historical Park
Lava Tree State Monument
MacKenzie State Recreation Area
Manuka State Wayside
Mauna Kea Ice Age Reserve
Mauna Kea State Recreation Area
Old Kona Airport State Recreation Area
Wailoa River State Recreation Area
Wailuku River State Park
Kaua‘i
Ahukini State Recreation Pier
Ha'ena State Park
Koke'e State Park
Nā Pali Coast State Park
Polihale State Park
Russian Fort Elizabeth State Historical Park
Wailua River State Park
Waimea Canyon State Park
Waimea State Recreational Pier
Maui
Haleki'i-Pihana Heiau State Monument
ʻĪao Valley State Monument
Kaumahina State Wayside Park
Makena State Park
Polipoli Spring State Recreation Area
Pua'a Ka'a State Wayside Park
Wai'anapanapa State Park
Wailua Valley State Wayside Park
Moloka‘i
Pala'au State Park
O‘ahu
Ahupua'a O Kahana State Park
'Aiea Bay State Recreation Area
Diamond Head State Monument
Hanauma Bay Nature Preserve
He‘eia State Park
‘Iolani Palace State Monument
Ka'ena Point State Park
Kaiwi State Scenic Shoreline
Kaka'ako Waterfront Park
Kea'iwa Heiau State Recreation Area
Kewalo Basin
Kukaniloko Birthstones State Monument
La'ie Point State Wayside
Makapu‘u Point State Wayside
Malaekahana State Recreation Area
Nu'uanu Pali State Wayside
Pu'u o Mahuka Heiau State Monument
Pu'u 'Ualaka'a State Wayside
Queen Emma Summer Palace
Royal Mausoleum State Monument
Sacred Falls State Park
Sand Island State Recreation Area
Ulupo Heiau State Historic Site
Wa'ahila Ridge State Recreation Area
Wahiawa Freshwater State Recreation Area
Hawai'i Department of Land and Natural Resources
v
t
e
National parks of the United States
Acadia
American Samoa
Arches
Badlands
Big Bend
Biscayne
Black Canyon of the Gunnison
Bryce Canyon
Canyonlands
Capitol Reef
Carlsbad Caverns
Channel Islands
Congaree
Crater Lake
Cuyahoga Valley
Death Valley
Denali
Dry Tortugas
Everglades
Gates of the Arctic
Glacier
Glacier Bay
Grand Canyon
Grand Teton
Great Basin
Great Sand Dunes
Great Smoky Mountains
Guadalupe Mountains
Haleakalā
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes
Hot Springs
Isle Royale
Joshua Tree
Katmai
Kenai Fjords
Kings Canyon
Kobuk Valley
Lake Clark
Lassen Volcanic
Mammoth Cave
Mesa Verde
Mount Rainier
North Cascades
Olympic
Petrified Forest
Pinnacles
Redwood
Rocky Mountain
Saguaro
Sequoia
Shenandoah
Theodore Roosevelt
Virgin Islands
Voyageurs
Wind Cave
Wrangell–St. Elias
Yellowstone
Yosemite
Zion
List of national parks of the United States (by elevation)
v
t
e
World Heritage Sites in the United States
Northeast
Independence Hall
Statue of Liberty
Midwest
Cahokia
South
Everglades
Great Smoky Mountains
Mammoth Cave
Monticello and the University of Virginia
Poverty Point
San Antonio Missions
West
Carlsbad Caverns
Chaco Culture National Historical Park
Grand Canyon National Park
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park
Kluane-Wrangell–St. Elias-Glacier Bay-Tatshenshini-Alsek1
Mesa Verde
Olympic National Park
Pueblo de Taos
Papahānaumokuākea
Redwood
Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park1
Yellowstone National Park
Yosemite National Park
Territories
La Fortaleza and San Juan National Historic Site
1 Shared with Canada
Authority control
VIAF: 154981137
GND: 4289892-4
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hawaiʻi_Volcanoes_National_Park&amp;oldid=698317162"					
				Categories: IUCN Category IIHawaiʻi Volcanoes National ParkProtected areas of Hawaii (island)National parks in HawaiiGeology museums in HawaiiMuseums in Hawaii County, HawaiiArchaeological sites in HawaiiProtected areas established in 1916World Heritage Sites in the United StatesHistoric American Engineering Record in HawaiiHistoric American Buildings Survey in Hawaii1916 establishments in HawaiiHidden categories: CS1 errors: datesCoordinates on WikidataArticles which use infobox templates with no data rowsArticles containing potentially dated statements from 2008All articles containing potentially dated statementsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
			Navigation menu
						Personal tools
							Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in						
						Namespaces
															Article
															Talk
							Variants
						Views
															Read
															Edit
															View history
						More
							Search
			Navigation
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
			Interaction
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
			Tools
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
			Print/export
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
			Languages
						العربيةБългарскиCatalàDanskDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançais한국어HrvatskiItalianoעבריתქართულიLatviešuMagyarമലയാളംNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålپنجابیPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSimple EnglishСрпски / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / српскохрватскиSuomiSvenskaTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng Việt中文					
				Edit links			
											 This page was last modified on 5 January 2016, at 10:09.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											Cookie statement
											Mobile view

