      Home  | Internal Audit 
            People Search
        Degree Search
Browse by school    
        Course Search
Search class sections | Online courses
        Library Search
Libraries | Hours &amp; locations | Ask
    Advising | Catalog | Tutors
    Writing Center | Math help room
    Finals Schedule | GPA Calculator
          CMS Login: KU Users | Non-KU Users
    KU Home
    About KU
    Admissions
    Athletics
    Alumni
    Campuses
    Social Media
    Endowment
    KU Today
                                Internal Audit 
      Search form
  Search 
      Home
AboutCharter
Audit Process
Contact
HotlineWhat is Fraud?
Reporting Process
Make a Report
Follow-up on a Report
FAQs
InternshipsInternships
PeopleStaff
Resources Resources
      MenuHome
AboutCharter
Audit Process
Contact
HotlineWhat is Fraud?
Reporting Process
Make a Report
Follow-up on a Report
FAQs
InternshipsInternships
PeopleStaff
Resources Resources
Search
      Search form
  Search 
        Internal Audit
Our Mission: Internal Audit provides independent, objective assurance and advisory services designed to add value and improve the operations of the University of Kansas and its controlled affiliated corporations. We help the University accomplish its objectives by bringing a systematic, disciplined approach to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of risk management, control, and governance processes.
Our Vision: Internal Audit will provide value-added audits and advisory services with objectivity, fairness, openness, and in accordance with the highest professional and ethical standards. We will build leadership and expertise within our office to help drive positive change and promote integrity in our organization. We will continually improve our operations and strive toward being a leader in the internal audit profession.
A "One-University" office, providing assurance and advisory services to:
	Lawrence campus&nbsp;(and its controlled affiliated corporations)
	Medical Center campuses (and&nbsp;their controlled affiliated corporations)
	Edwards campus
Internal Audit conducts operational, compliance, and financial-related audits and investigations for the University of Kansas in accordance with the International Professional Practices Framework promulgated by the Institute of&nbsp;Internal Auditors. Our reporting relationships to the Chancellor, the Kansas Board of Regents, and the University's chief business officer help ensure independence and objectivity in the performance of our work. We further assist University departments and other units by providing training and consultation on good business and internal&nbsp;control practices.
DISCLAIMER: Internal Audit of the University of Kansas publishes these web pages for general information only. The pages are not intended to provide specific advice for any specific situation. While we try to provide links to timely and authoritative information, the content of linked sites is subject to local disclaimers, and Internal Audit makes no guarantees, express or implied, concerning its accuracy. We recommend that users obtain confirmation from official sources of all information found on the internet
&nbsp;
              University of Kansas Hotline
      The University of Kansas recognizes its obligation to employees and constituents to maintain the highest ethical standards. The University has established a hotline, administered by EthicsPoint, to facilitate anonymous reporting of activities that may involve suspected fraud or other wrongdoing.&nbsp; You may use either of the following two methods to submit a report.
1) Select the&nbsp;"Make a Report"&nbsp;link under the "Hotline" menu option of this web page or click&nbsp;here.
2) Dial toll-free, within the United States, Guam, Puerto Rico and Canada: 844-420-9065
After you complete your report you will be assigned a unique code called a "report key."&nbsp; Write down your report key and password and keep them in a safe place.&nbsp; After&nbsp;5-6&nbsp;business days, use your report key and password to check your report for feedback or questions.
EthicsPoint is NOT a 911 or Emergency Service.&nbsp; Do not use this site to report events presenting an immediate threat to life or property. Reports submitted through this service may not receive an immediate response. If you require emergency assistance, please contact your local authorities.
              Related
	Office of Business &amp; Financial Planning
	IT Security
	Policy Library
            Why KU
                                    Apply &raquo;
                                            One of 34 U.S. public institutions in the prestigious Association of American Universities
                                            26 prestigious Rhodes Scholars &mdash; more than all other Kansas colleges combined
                                            Nearly $290 million in financial aid annually
                                            44 nationally ranked graduate programs.
&mdash;U.S. News &amp; World Report
                                            Top 50 nationwide for size of library collection.
&mdash;ALA
                                            23rd nationwide for service to veterans
&mdash;"Best for Vets," Military Times
        Give to KU &raquo;
    KU Today
      Contact Internal Audit 
                    internalaudit@ku.edu
                            785-864-0042
        351 Strong Hall
1450 Jayhawk Blvd.
Lawrence, KS 66045-7535
    Academics
    Admissions
    Alumni
    Athletics
    Campuses
    Giving
    Jobs
      Contact KU
Lawrence, KS | Maps    
    The University of Kansas prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, ethnicity, religion, sex, national origin, age, ancestry, disability, status as a veteran, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, gender identity, gender expression, and genetic information in the university’s programs and activities. Retaliation is also prohibited by university policy. The following persons have been designated to handle inquiries regarding the nondiscrimination policies and are the Title IX coordinators for their respective campuses: Executive Director of the Office of Institutional Opportunity & Access, IOA@ku.edu, 1246 West Campus Road, Room 153A, Lawrence, KS 66045, 785-864-6414, 711 TTY (for the Lawrence, Edwards, Parsons, Yoder, and Topeka campuses); Director, Equal Opportunity Office, Mail Stop 7004, 4330 Shawnee Mission Parkway, Fairway, KS 66205, 913-588-8011, 711 TTY (for the Wichita, Salina, and Kansas City, Kansas, medical center campuses).

