      Home | AAAC Tutoring Services
            People Search
        Degree Search
Browse by school    
        Course Search
Search class sections | Online courses
        Library Search
Libraries | Hours &amp; locations | Ask
    Advising | Catalog | Tutors
    Writing Center | Math help room
    Finals Schedule | GPA Calculator
          CMS Login: KU Users | Non-KU Users
    KU Home
    About KU
    Admissions
    Athletics
    Alumni
    Campuses
    Social Media
    Endowment
    KU Today
                                AAAC Tutoring Services
                                        Academic Achievement &amp; Access Center
      Search form
  Search 
      Home
About UsAbout Tutoring Services
Contact
Request a Tutor Group
Fee Waivers
I Want to Be a Tutor
Faculty Center
      MenuHome
About UsAbout Tutoring Services
Contact
Request a Tutor Group
Fee Waivers
I Want to Be a Tutor
Faculty Center
Search
      Search form
  Search 
        News and Events
Pre-Registration for Tutoring in Fall 2016 Courses is Open 
Why pre-register for tutoring?  Pre-registration enables you to view and select tutor groups during a 48-hour window before students who did not pre-register.  Students who pre-register will receive an email on Friday, August 26, notifying them that the group request process is open only to them.  Then, after 48 hours, the system will open to all students at the University of Kansas.  There is no obligation associated with pre-registration—it gives AAAC Tutoring Services a notice that you may need tutoring in a specific course and gives you the chance to select a tutor group before students who did not pre-register.  Students are placed in tutor groups on a first-come, first-served, by schedule basis.  Pre-register today!   
Pre-Register for Fall 2016 Now! 
The Tutor Group Request Period for Spring 2016 has Ended
The last day to request a tutor group for the spring semester was Friday, April 1.  If you need tutoring for a course yet this spring, be sure to check with your professor and the academic department.   
Summer Tutoring will be Available
Tutoring for Summer 2016 will be available for 8-week classes only.  Students may pre-register for summer tutoring by sending an email to tutoring@ku.edu or by calling (785) 864-7733.  Be sure to include your name, email address, phone number, and the specific course(s) for which you may need tutoring. The online request process for summer tutoring will begin Thursday, June 9.
              Other Tutoring Resources
      HAWK Link
	SES
	KU Writing Center
	School of Engineering
	Student Athlete Tutoring
	Math Department Tutoring
                    RT @KUnews : Before the year ends, #exploreKU  and stop to smell the tulips, like Bea.
https://t.co/r4qKaaOWeh  https://t.co/rFdsReL3VQ 
                    &laquo;&raquo;
                    Follow us on Twitter &raquo;
    .twitter{
        z-index:999;
    }
            Why KU
                                    Apply &raquo;
                                            One of 34 U.S. public institutions in the prestigious Association of American Universities
                                            26 prestigious Rhodes Scholars &mdash; more than all other Kansas colleges combined
                                            Nearly $290 million in financial aid annually
                                            44 nationally ranked graduate programs.
&mdash;U.S. News &amp; World Report
                                            Top 50 nationwide for size of library collection.
&mdash;ALA
                                            23rd nationwide for service to veterans
&mdash;"Best for Vets," Military Times
    KU Today
        Give to KU &raquo;
      Contact AAAC Tutoring Services
                    tutoring@ku.edu
                            785-864-7733
        Tutoring Services
1445 Jayhawk Boulevard
Wescoe Hall, Room 4017
Lawrence, KS 66045    
      Tutor Login
    Academics
    Admissions
    Alumni
    Athletics
    Campuses
    Giving
    Jobs
      Contact KU
Lawrence, KS | Maps    
    The University of Kansas prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, ethnicity, religion, sex, national origin, age, ancestry, disability, status as a veteran, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, gender identity, gender expression, and genetic information in the university’s programs and activities. Retaliation is also prohibited by university policy. The following persons have been designated to handle inquiries regarding the nondiscrimination policies and are the Title IX coordinators for their respective campuses: Executive Director of the Office of Institutional Opportunity & Access, IOA@ku.edu, 1246 West Campus Road, Room 153A, Lawrence, KS 66045, 785-864-6414, 711 TTY (for the Lawrence, Edwards, Parsons, Yoder, and Topeka campuses); Director, Equal Opportunity Office, Mail Stop 7004, 4330 Shawnee Mission Parkway, Fairway, KS 66205, 913-588-8011, 711 TTY (for the Wichita, Salina, and Kansas City, Kansas, medical center campuses).

