      Home | KU Info
            People Search
        Degree Search
Browse by school    
        Course Search
Search class sections | Online courses
        Library Search
Libraries | Hours &amp; locations | Ask
    Advising | Catalog | Tutors
    Writing Center | Math help room
    Finals Schedule | GPA Calculator
          CMS Login: KU Users | Non-KU Users
    KU Home
    About KU
    Admissions
    Athletics
    Alumni
    Campuses
    Social Media
    Endowment
    KU Today
                                KU Info
      Home
AboutWhat is KU Info
Categories
Ask a Question
      MenuHome
AboutWhat is KU Info
Categories
Ask a Question
Search
      Search form
  Search 
KU Info is here to help you navigate KU. You can call us at (785) 864-3506, search our questions database above, or visit us at our Info Booth, 4th floor of the KS Union. Our staff is dedicated to helping the extended KU community with information about KU life and beyond.
        Didn't find what you were looking for?
Browse our categories
	Ask us a question
	Text us your question
        Info Alerts
          Can I really text my question to KU Info?  
          How does camping for basketball games work?  
          How many students were enrolled at KU in ____?  
          Is there a shuttle that goes to KCI (MCI) airport?  
          What is the meaning of life?  
              Daily KU Info!
          &nbsp;
Subscribe to Daily KU Info
        Subscribe
    About the Area
            Friendly folks. A big city vibe. Discover all that’s great about Lawrence.  
            Lawrence, Kan.
            A beautiful, hilly campus is just one reason why Jayhawks fall in love with KU.  Find out more. 
            The University
            Why KU
                                    Apply &raquo;
                                            One of 34 U.S. public institutions in the prestigious Association of American Universities
                                            26 prestigious Rhodes Scholars &mdash; more than all other Kansas colleges combined
                                            Nearly $290 million in financial aid annually
                                            44 nationally ranked graduate programs.
&mdash;U.S. News &amp; World Report
                                            Top 50 nationwide for size of library collection.
&mdash;ALA
                                            23rd nationwide for service to veterans
&mdash;"Best for Vets," Military Times
    KU Today
        Give to KU &raquo;
      Contact KU Info
                    kuinfo@ku.edu
                            (785) 864-3506
        The University of Kansas
Lawrence, KS 66045
    Academics
    Admissions
    Alumni
    Athletics
    Campuses
    Giving
    Jobs
      Contact KU
Lawrence, KS | Maps    
    The University of Kansas prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, ethnicity, religion, sex, national origin, age, ancestry, disability, status as a veteran, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, gender identity, gender expression, and genetic information in the university’s programs and activities. Retaliation is also prohibited by university policy. The following persons have been designated to handle inquiries regarding the nondiscrimination policies and are the Title IX coordinators for their respective campuses: Executive Director of the Office of Institutional Opportunity & Access, IOA@ku.edu, 1246 West Campus Road, Room 153A, Lawrence, KS 66045, 785-864-6414, 711 TTY (for the Lawrence, Edwards, Parsons, Yoder, and Topeka campuses); Director, Equal Opportunity Office, Mail Stop 7004, 4330 Shawnee Mission Parkway, Fairway, KS 66205, 913-588-8011, 711 TTY (for the Wichita, Salina, and Kansas City, Kansas, medical center campuses).

