      Home Page | Degree Progress Report
            People Search
        Degree Search
Browse by school    
        Course Search
Search class sections | Online courses
        Library Search
Libraries | Hours &amp; locations | Ask
    Advising | Catalog | Tutors
    Writing Center | Math help room
    Finals Schedule | GPA Calculator
          CMS Login: KU Users | Non-KU Users
    KU Home
    About KU
    Admissions
    Athletics
    Alumni
    Campuses
    Social Media
    Endowment
    KU Today
                                Degree Progress Report
      Search form
  Search 
      Home
Generate Your DPR
Get Your Course History
GPA CalculatorRaise GPA to Minimum
Semester (Term) GPA to Raise GPA
      MenuHome
Generate Your DPR
Get Your Course History
GPA CalculatorRaise GPA to Minimum
Semester (Term) GPA to Raise GPA
Search
      Search form
  Search 
        Degree Progress Report
The Degree Progress Report (DPR),&nbsp;which replaces the ARTS Form, is an online self-serve tool that allows you to track your progress toward completion of degree requirements. The generated report will
	List course work completed at KU and at other schools from which you submitted official transcripts
	List course work currently in progress
	Place course work into degree requirement sections
	Identify KU school requirements you still need to satisfy to graduate
        How to Generate Your DPR
Download&nbsp;This Tutorial&nbsp;for screen shots.
	Log in to the&nbsp;myKU Portal&nbsp;with your KU Online ID and password.
	Click the My Progress link from the left menu.
	(If you are an adviser, follow this step. If you are a student, skip to Step 4) Type the student's name or KU student identification number in the search box and click Search.
	Select the Progress tab in the upper right-hand corner of the student information window.
        Get Your Course History
Download&nbsp;This Tutorial&nbsp;for step-by-step information on how to download a listing of your classes taken by term and other academic information.
What-If reports
To create your DPR with a different major, select "Create a new degree progress report for a What-If new field of study" and click the "Generate Report" button. This will not change your major. It will only provide you with information.
Advising appointments
Use DPR to monitor your progress and prepare for meetings with your academic adviser.&nbsp;Always consult your adviser before finalizing any decisions related to your academic plan. The DPR is for tracking your academic progress only and is not an official document.
GPA Calculator
            Why KU
                                    Apply &raquo;
                                            One of 34 U.S. public institutions in the prestigious Association of American Universities
                                            26 prestigious Rhodes Scholars &mdash; more than all other Kansas colleges combined
                                            Nearly $290 million in financial aid annually
                                            44 nationally ranked graduate programs.
&mdash;U.S. News &amp; World Report
                                            Top 50 nationwide for size of library collection.
&mdash;ALA
                                            23rd nationwide for service to veterans
&mdash;"Best for Vets," Military Times
    KU Today
        Give to KU &raquo;
      Contact Degree Progress Report
                    itcsc@ku.edu
        Degree Progress Report
Student Information Systems
The University of Kansas
Lawrence, Kansas 66045    
    Academics
    Admissions
    Alumni
    Athletics
    Campuses
    Giving
    Jobs
      Contact KU
Lawrence, KS | Maps    
    The University of Kansas prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, ethnicity, religion, sex, national origin, age, ancestry, disability, status as a veteran, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, gender identity, gender expression, and genetic information in the university’s programs and activities. Retaliation is also prohibited by university policy. The following persons have been designated to handle inquiries regarding the nondiscrimination policies and are the Title IX coordinators for their respective campuses: Executive Director of the Office of Institutional Opportunity & Access, IOA@ku.edu, 1246 West Campus Road, Room 153A, Lawrence, KS 66045, 785-864-6414, 711 TTY (for the Lawrence, Edwards, Parsons, Yoder, and Topeka campuses); Director, Equal Opportunity Office, Mail Stop 7004, 4330 Shawnee Mission Parkway, Fairway, KS 66205, 913-588-8011, 711 TTY (for the Wichita, Salina, and Kansas City, Kansas, medical center campuses).

