      Jayhawk Buddy System | Jayhawk Buddy System
            People Search
        Degree Search
Browse by school    
        Course Search
Search class sections | Online courses
        Library Search
Libraries | Hours &amp; locations | Ask
    Advising | Catalog | Tutors
    Writing Center | Math help room
    Finals Schedule | GPA Calculator
          CMS Login: KU Users | Non-KU Users
    KU Home
    About KU
    Admissions
    Athletics
    Alumni
    Campuses
    Social Media
    Endowment
    KU Today
                                Jayhawk Buddy System
      Search form
  Search 
      Home
AboutContact JBS
JBS Flash Mob
Be a Buddy
ToolkitProtective Behaviors
Look Out for Your Buddy
You Can Make a Difference
Know Your Limit
Resources
      MenuHome
AboutContact JBS
JBS Flash Mob
Be a Buddy
ToolkitProtective Behaviors
Look Out for Your Buddy
You Can Make a Difference
Know Your Limit
Resources
Search
      Search form
  Search 
        The Jayhawk Buddy System is designed to help everyone have a good time and stay safe. It is built on the longstanding tradition that Jayhawks look out for each other.
The vast majority of Jayhawks generally make safe choices while having a good time.  The intent of the Jayhawk Buddy System is to empower students to intervene when their friends are moving in a direction that is likely to result in arrest, injury or other undesirable consequences. An effective strategy is to intervene while buddies are still able to listen to reason.  Difficult situations can be averted by using the Jayhawk Buddy System toolkit.
For tips on how to have a good time safely, print the Jayhawk Buddy System Decalogue of Drinking Poster (pdf), and remember, always look out for your buddy.
Jayhawk Buddy System 2014 Annual Report (pdf)
                  Tweets by @KUJBS
    KU Today
    About the Area
            Friendly folks. A big city vibe. Discover all that’s great about Lawrence.  
            Lawrence, Kan.
            A beautiful, hilly campus is just one reason why Jayhawks fall in love with KU.  Find out more. 
            The University
            Why KU
                                    Apply &raquo;
                                            One of 34 U.S. public institutions in the prestigious Association of American Universities
                                            26 prestigious Rhodes Scholars &mdash; more than all other Kansas colleges combined
                                            Nearly $290 million in financial aid annually
                                            44 nationally ranked graduate programs.
&mdash;U.S. News &amp; World Report
                                            Top 50 nationwide for size of library collection.
&mdash;ALA
                                            23rd nationwide for service to veterans
&mdash;"Best for Vets," Military Times
        Give to KU &raquo;
      Contact Jayhawk Buddy System
                    jbs@ku.edu
                            785-864-9500
                            Routes 27, 38, 42
        Watkins Health Services
1200 Schwegler Drive 
Lawrence, KS 66045     
    Academics
    Admissions
    Alumni
    Athletics
    Campuses
    Giving
    Jobs
      Contact KU
Lawrence, KS | Maps    
    The University of Kansas prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, ethnicity, religion, sex, national origin, age, ancestry, disability, status as a veteran, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, gender identity, gender expression, and genetic information in the university’s programs and activities. Retaliation is also prohibited by university policy. The following persons have been designated to handle inquiries regarding the nondiscrimination policies and are the Title IX coordinators for their respective campuses: Executive Director of the Office of Institutional Opportunity & Access, IOA@ku.edu, 1246 West Campus Road, Room 153A, Lawrence, KS 66045, 785-864-6414, 711 TTY (for the Lawrence, Edwards, Parsons, Yoder, and Topeka campuses); Director, Equal Opportunity Office, Mail Stop 7004, 4330 Shawnee Mission Parkway, Fairway, KS 66205, 913-588-8011, 711 TTY (for the Wichita, Salina, and Kansas City, Kansas, medical center campuses).

