    Kansas University Technology Commercialization Patent Licensing Offices | University of Kansas, Innovation and Collaboration
				-->
    Faculty              Researchers
    Your Industry Portal          
    Identify a Corporate Partner          
    Non-Disclosure Agreements          
    Transferring Materials          
    Industry Sponsored Research          
    Example Partnerships          
    Pursue Funding          
    Identify a Foundation or Non-profit Sponsor          
    Proof of Concept Fund          
    Protect Your Idea          
    Disclose an Invention, Biological Material or Software Program          
    Request a Meeting with a Licensing Associate or Director          
    Transferring Materials          
    Non-Disclosure Agreements          
    Protecting Intellectual Property          
    Tech Transfer Process          
    KU Policies Related to Commercialization          
    Start A Business          
    Entrepreneurs@KU          
    Swift Startup License          
    Apply for a Mentor          
    Access Forms, Information, Policies, Guidelines & Processes          
    Forms          
    Policies Related to Commercialization          
    Guides          
    Licensing Process and Guidelines          
    Resources          
    FAQ          
    Corporate Partners              and Sponsors
    Sponsor Research          
    Access Capabilities          
    Access Student Talent          
    Give          
    Educate          
    Licensing          
    Relocate          
    Affiliate          
    Entrepreneurs              Start-Ups & Inventors
    Become a Mentor          
    Licensing          
    Pursue Funding          
    Kansas Department of Commerce          
    Incubate          
    Entrepreneurs@KU          
    Startup School          
    Licensing              KU Assets
    Browse All          
    Advanced Search          
    Contact Technology Transfer          
    About KUIC              News, Events & Staff
    Staff          
    Success Stories          
    Products in the Marketplace          
    Events          
    Technology Tuesday          
    News          
    Blog          
    Career Opportunities          
    Contact Us          
    FAQs          
				A Blueprint for Innovation
				As a top-tier public research university, The University of Kansas is committed to the education of our students, the support of our faculty, and the public benefit of our society.
				Whether we&rsquo;re helping to license a technology, getting additional funding for university researchers from industry or foundations, or supporting entrepreneurs launching a new venture &ndash; KUIC is open for business.
				Faculty &amp; Research
				You&rsquo;re The Reason We&rsquo;re Here
				Your research at The University of Kansas is the driving force behind this great university. It attracts top students and faculty and creates ideas that will make our society better in every imaginable way.
					Have An Idea? See What The Next Step Is.
					KU Success Stories
					Contact the KU Innovation and Collaboration (KUIC) Staff
				Learn More
				Corporate Partners
				Your Portal to KU
				With more than 2,000 professors working on innovative research in state-of-the-art facilities, The University of Kansas is open to partnering with business.
					Expertise and Capabilities
					How to Partner with KU
					Licensing Existing Technology
				Learn More
				Entrepreneurs
				We Can Help With Your Start-Up
				One of the goals of The University of Kansas is to move innovation to the market place and affect positive change on society. This is where entrepreneurs step in.
					Companies Created At KU
					Have An Idea? See What The Next Step Is.
					Start Up Company Check List
				Learn More
				License Technology
				KU Technology + Your Vision
				KU has an impressive track record of helping bring innovation to the marketplace. You don’t have to look hard to find successful companies with their roots in KU technology.
				Our licensing group can help you find the technology that best suits your needs and facilitate the entire licensing process, providing you with a cost-effective solution and a single point of contact for streamlined communication.
      News &amp; Updates
What's Happening On The Hill
          Julie Nagel Named Associate Vice Chancellor for Innovation and Entrepreneurship at KU  
          Kansas City just launched a $10M co-investment fund for its startup community  
          KU Startup School Equips Faculty and Students for Entrepreneurships  
      Learn More    
	About KUIC
	Focus on Progress
	KUIC is committed to helping drive KU Innovations into the marketplace.  Learn more about how the activites and programs for faculty members creates an environment where they can take their research to the next level. Read more  
-->
	To see our progress and plans for the future, view our Annual Report.
	Meet Staff
      Upcoming Events
Information &amp; Registration     
          Technology Tuesday    
          May 17, 2016    
      Learn More    
	KU Innovation and Collaboration (KUIC)
	Lawrence campus: (785) 864-6401
	Medical Center: (913) 588-5711
	kuic@ku.edu
  Home
Faculty
Corporate Partners
Entrepreneurs
Licensing
About KUIC
     Follow Us On Twitter       
     The University of Kansas prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, ethnicity, religion, sex, national origin, age, ancestry, disability, status as a veteran, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, gender identity, gender expression and genetic information in the University&#39;s programs and activities. The following person has been designated to handle inquiries regarding the non-discrimination policies: Director of the Office of Institutional Opportunity and Access, IOA@ku.edu, 1246 W. Campus Road, Room 153A, Lawrence, KS, 66045, (785)864-6414, 711 TTY.   

