                    Toggle navigation
                    The University of Kansas(current)
                KU Event Calendar
                        Today's Events
                            Browse by Type 
                                Academic Dates
                                Athletics
                                Ceremony
                                Community Event / Outreach / Social
                                Conference / Symposium / Seminar
                                Exhibition / Field Trip / Tour
                                Holiday
                                Lecture / Presentation / Defense
                                Meeting
                                Orientation
                                Performance
                                Recreation
                                Recruiting
                                Student Group
                                Training / Professional Development
                                Tutoring / Study Session / Review
                                Youth Program / Camp
        Your browser must support JavaScript to view this content.
        Please enable JavaScript in your browser settings then try again.
            Your browser must support JavaScript to view this content.
            Please enable JavaScript in your browser settings then try again.
            KU For You
            View KU Today for campus events.
            About this site
                Policies & Procedures
                RSS & iCal Feeds
                Contact Us
        Submit an event
        We invite all campus event organizers to post your event listings to the calendar.
             LOGIN
            New? Request an account
                    Academics
                    Admissions
                    Alumni
                    Athletics
                    Campuses
                    Contacts
                    Giving
                    Jobs
                    Maps
                    The University of Kansas prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, ethnicity, religion, sex, national origin, age, ancestry, disability, status as a veteran, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, gender identity, gender expression, and genetic information in the university’s programs and activities. Retaliation is also prohibited by university policy. The following persons have been designated to handle inquiries regarding the nondiscrimination policies and are the Title IX coordinators for their respective campuses: Executive Director of the Office of Institutional Opportunity & Access, IOA@ku.edu, 1246 West Campus Road, Room 153A, Lawrence, KS 66045, 785-864-6414, 711 TTY (for the Lawrence, Edwards, Parsons, Yoder, and Topeka campuses); Director, Equal Opportunity Office, Mail Stop 7004, 4330 Shawnee Mission Parkway, Fairway, KS 66205, 913-588-8011, 711 TTY (for the Wichita, Salina, and Kansas City, Kansas, medical center campuses).

