      KU on Wheels | KU on Wheels
            People Search
        Degree Search
Browse by school    
        Course Search
Search class sections | Online courses
        Library Search
Libraries | Hours &amp; locations | Ask
    Advising | Catalog | Tutors
    Writing Center | Math help room
    Finals Schedule | GPA Calculator
          CMS Login: KU Users | Non-KU Users
    KU Home
    About KU
    Admissions
    Athletics
    Alumni
    Campuses
    Social Media
    Endowment
    KU Today
                                KU on Wheels
                                        Parking &amp; Transit Office
      Search form
  Search 
      Home
Routes & Schedules &raquo;
AboutMission
KU Staff
Student Senate
Transit Commission
Coordination with City
StatisticsRidership
Research Projects
Service Provider
FacilityTransit Facility
Contact
Lost & Found
      MenuHome
Routes & Schedules &raquo;
AboutMission
KU Staff
Student Senate
Transit Commission
Coordination with City
StatisticsRidership
Research Projects
Service Provider
FacilityTransit Facility
Contact
Lost & Found
Search
      Search form
  Search 
        KU on Wheels exists to provide safe, convenient, reliable and responsive public transit services to enhance the social and environmental well-being of the University of Kansas community.
 
        Figure out how to get there
First-time rider? Try our Google Trip Planner - type in an origin and destination and see which routes it suggests.
	Repeat rider? If you are more familiar with the system, you might find the Routes and Times more helpful.
If you need assistance, call (785) 864-4644.
Or ask any bus driver - they are there to help!
        Spring Service (1/19 - 5/13)
All routes are operating as usual. Routes 27-38, 42 and 43 will not operate during Spring Breakor on Stop Day.
Mobile Tools
Check out our mobile tools for finding out when the next bus is coming to your stop.
            Fast Facts
                                    Quick Links
                                            We have operated since 1971, and KU has owned its own wheelchair-accessible buses since 2007
                                            Two routes (11 and 29) are co-funded by KU and Lawrence Transit
                                            KU and Lawrence Transit gave 2.9 million rides in 2012
                                            Students, staff, and faculty can ride any bus in town FREE with their KU Card
                                            We keep items found on a bus for two weeks
                                            For safety and efficiency, board at the front of a bus and exit at the rear
                                            Game-day shuttles operate two hours before kickoff / tipoff
                                            All buses have bike racks (first come, first served)
                                            Visibility around buses is extremely limited; don’t cross the street in front of a bus
                                            Visibility around buses is extremely limited; don’t run after a bus once it starts to pull away
                                            We allow drinks in permanent travel mugs only. No paper or plastic drink cups
                                            SafeRide and SafeBus give students a free ride home late at night. Call 864-SAFE between 10:30 p.m. and 2:30 a.m. 
                                            KU on Wheels is funded by student fees and parking permit dollars; 11 KU buses are federally funded buses 
                Routes &amp; Schedules are on the Lawrence Transit website.
Report an item you lost on a bus.
&nbsp;
SafeBus/SafeRide »
Parking »
      Contact KU on Wheels
                    kuonwheels@ku.edu
                            (785) 864-4644
        Allen Fieldhouse Garage
1501 Irving Hill Road
Lawrence, KS 66045    
      Office Hours
7:30 a.m. - 5 p.m., Monday - Thursday
7:30 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. Friday
Closed Saturday - Sunday, and Holidays
    Academics
    Admissions
    Alumni
    Athletics
    Campuses
    Giving
    Jobs
      Contact KU
Lawrence, KS | Maps    
    The University of Kansas prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, ethnicity, religion, sex, national origin, age, ancestry, disability, status as a veteran, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, gender identity, gender expression, and genetic information in the university’s programs and activities. Retaliation is also prohibited by university policy. The following persons have been designated to handle inquiries regarding the nondiscrimination policies and are the Title IX coordinators for their respective campuses: Executive Director of the Office of Institutional Opportunity & Access, IOA@ku.edu, 1246 West Campus Road, Room 153A, Lawrence, KS 66045, 785-864-6414, 711 TTY (for the Lawrence, Edwards, Parsons, Yoder, and Topeka campuses); Director, Equal Opportunity Office, Mail Stop 7004, 4330 Shawnee Mission Parkway, Fairway, KS 66205, 913-588-8011, 711 TTY (for the Wichita, Salina, and Kansas City, Kansas, medical center campuses).

