Lassen Volcanic National Park - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Lake Helen in Lassen Volcanic National Park
Location
Shasta, Lassen, Plumas, and Tehama Counties, California, USA
Nearestcity
Redding and Susanville
Coordinates
40°29′16″N 121°30′18″W﻿ / ﻿40.4876594°N 121.5049807°W﻿ / 40.4876594; -121.5049807Coordinates: 40°29′16″N 121°30′18″W﻿ / ﻿40.4876594°N 121.5049807°W﻿ / 40.4876594; -121.5049807
Area
106,452 acres (166.331sqmi; 43,080ha; 430.80km2)[1]
Established
August 9, 1916
Visitors
407,653 (in2012)[2]
Governingbody
National Park Service
Map of Lassen Volcanic National park
Mount Shasta from Lassen Peak
Lassen Volcanic National Park is a United States National Park in northeastern California. The dominant feature of the park is Lassen Peak, the largest plug dome volcano in the world and the southern-most volcano in the Cascade Range.[3] Lassen Volcanic National Park started as two separate national monuments designated by President Theodore Roosevelt in 1907: Cinder Cone National Monument and Lassen Peak National Monument.[4]
The source of heat for volcanism in the Lassen area is subduction off the Northern California coast of the Gorda Plate diving below the North American Plate.[5] The area surrounding Lassen Peak is still active with boiling mud pots, stinking fumaroles, and churning hot springs.[6] Lassen Volcanic National Park is one of the few areas in the world where all four types of volcano can be found (plug dome, shield, cinder cone, and strato).[7]
The park is accessible via State Routes SR 89 and SR 44. SR 89 passes north-south through the park, beginning at SR 36 to the south and ending at SR 44 to the north. SR 89 passes immediately adjacent the base of Lassen Peak.
There are a total of five vehicle entrances to the park: the north and south entrances on SR 89, and unpaved roads entering at Drakesbad and Juniper Lake in the south, and Butte Lake in the northeast. The Park can also be accessed by trails leading in from Caribou Wilderness to the east, as well as the Pacific Crest Trail, and two smaller trails leading in from Willow Lake and Little Willow Lake to the south.
A large lodge (the Lassen Chalet) with concession facilities was located near the south-west entrance, but was demolished in 2005. A new, full-service visitor center was constructed in the same location, and opened to the public in 2008. Near the old lodge location was also located Lassen Ski Area, which ceased operation in 1992; all infrastructure has been removed.
Contents
1 History
2 Geography, geology and climate
3 Plants
4 Geology
4.1 Formation of basement rocks
4.2 Volcanoes rise
5 See also
6 Footnotes
7 References
8 External links
History[edit]
Native Americans have inhabited the area since long before white settlers first saw Lassen. The natives knew that the peak was full of fire and water and thought it would one day blow itself apart.[8]
White immigrants in the mid-19th century used Lassen Peak as a landmark on their trek to the fertile Sacramento Valley. One of the guides to these immigrants was a Danish blacksmith named Peter Lassen, who settled in Northern California in the 1830s. Lassen Peak was named after him.[8] Nobles Emigrant Trail was later cut through the park area and passed Cinder Cone and the Fantastic Lava Beds.
Inconsistent newspaper accounts reported by witnesses from 1850 to 1851 described seeing "fire thrown to a terrible height" and "burning lava running down the sides" in the area of Cinder Cone. As late as 1859, a witness reported seeing fire in the sky from a distance, attributing it to an eruption. Early geologists and volcanologists who studied the Cinder Cone concluded the last eruption occurred between 1675 and 1700. After the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens, the United States Geological Survey (USGS) began reassessing the potential risk of other active volcanic areas in the Cascade Range. Further study of Cinder Cone estimated the last eruption occurred between 1630 and 1670. Recent tree-ring analysis has placed the date at 1666.
The Lassen area was first protected by being designated as the Lassen Peak Forest Preserve. Lassen Peak and Cinder Cone were later declared as U.S. National Monuments in May 1907 by President Theodore Roosevelt.[9]
Brokeoff Mountain, Lassen Peak, and Chaos Crags, from left to right. The area of Lassen Peak that was lost during the 1914–15 volcanic event is visible in this picture, encompassing the sliver of snow.
Starting in May 1914 and lasting until 1921, a series of minor to major eruptions occurred on Lassen. These events created a new crater, and released lava and a great deal of ash. Fortunately, because of warnings, no one was killed, but several houses along area creeks were destroyed. Because of the eruptive activity, which continued through 1917, and the area's stark volcanic beauty, Lassen Peak, Cinder Cone and the area surrounding were declared a National Park on August 9, 1916.[8]
The 29-mile (47km) Main Park Road was constructed between 1925 and 1931, just 10 years after Lassen Peak erupted. Near Lassen Peak the road reaches 8,512 feet (2,594m), making it the highest road in the Cascade Mountains. It is not unusual for 40ft (12m) of snow to accumulate on the road near Lake Helen and for patches of snow to last into July.
In October 1972, a portion of the park was designated as Lassen Volcanic Wilderness by the US Congress (Public Law 92-511). The National Park Service seeks to manage the wilderness in keeping with the Wilderness Act of 1964, with minimal developed facilities, signage, and trails. The management plan of 2003 adds that, "The wilderness experience offers a moderate to high degree of challenge and adventure."[10]
In 1974, the National Park Service took the advice of the USGS and closed the visitor center and accommodations at Manzanita Lake. The Survey stated that these buildings would be in the way of a rockslide from Chaos Crags if an earthquake or eruption occurred in the area.[8] An aging seismograph station remains. However, a campground, store, and museum dedicated to Benjamin F. Loomis stands near Manzanita Lake, welcoming visitors who enter the park from the northwest entrance.
After the Mount St. Helens eruption, the USGS intensified its monitoring of active and potentially active volcanoes in the Cascade Range. Monitoring of the Lassen area includes periodic measurements of ground deformation and volcanic-gas emissions and continuous transmission of data from a local network of nine seismometers to USGS offices in Menlo Park, California.[11] Should indications of a significant increase in volcanic activity be detected, the USGS will immediately deploy scientists and specially designed portable monitoring instruments to evaluate the threat. In addition, the National Park Service (NPS) has developed an emergency response plan that would be activated to protect the public in the event of an impending eruption.
Visitors To Lassen National Park by Year[12]
Year
Recreational Visitors
2011
351,269
2010
384,570
2009
365,639
2008
377,361
2007
395,057
The National Park Service counts visitors to Lassen National Park by using in-road inductive loops at all the vehicle entrances to count vehicles entering the park. Buses and other non-reportable vehicles are subtracted from the vehicle counts and then a persons-per-vehicle multiplier of 3 is multiplied by the vehicle number.[13]
Geography, geology and climate[edit]
Map of Lassen area showing hydrothermal features (red dots) and volcanic feature or remnant (yellow cones). Also shown is the outline of Brokeoff Volcano (Mount Tehama).
The park is located near the northern end of the Sacramento Valley. The western part of the park features great lava pinnacles (huge mountains created by lava flows), jagged craters, and steaming sulphur vents. It is cut by glaciated canyons and is dotted and threaded by lakes and rushing clear streams.
Lassen Peak reflected in Manzanita Lake
The eastern part of the park is a vast lava plateau more than one mile (1.6km) above sea level. Here, small cinder cones are found. (Fairfield Peak, Hat Mountain, and Crater Butte).[14] Forested with pine and fir, this area is studded with small lakes, but it boasts few streams. Warner Valley, marking the southern edge of the Lassen Plateau, features hot spring areas (Boiling Springs Lake, Devils Kitchen, and Terminal Geyser).[14] This forested, steep valley also has large meadows that have wildflowers in spring.
Lassen Peak is made of dacite, an igneous rock, and is one of the world's largest plug dome volcanoes. It is also the southernmost non-extinct volcano of the Cascade Range (specifically, the Shasta Cascade part of the range). 10,457-foot (3,187m) tall volcano sits on the north-east flank of the remains of Mount Tehama, a stratovolcano that was a thousand feet (305 m) higher than Lassen and 11 to 15 miles (18 to 24km) wide at its base.[8] After emptying its throat and partially doing the same to its magma chamber in a series of eruptions, Tehama either collapsed into itself and formed a two-mile (3.2km) wide caldera in the late Pleistocene or was simply eroded away with the help of acidic vapors that loosened and broke the rock, which was later carried away by glaciers.
Broken face of Brokeoff Mountain
On the other side of the present caldera is Brokeoff Mountain (9,235 feet or 2,815 m), which is an erosional remnant of Mount Tehama and the second highest peak in the park. Mount Conrad, Mount Diller, and Pilot Pinnacle are also remnant peaks around the caldera.
View of Cinder Cone from the Cinder Cone Trail that leads to it. The trees are Jeffrey pines (Pinus jeffreyi).
Sulphur Works is a geothermal area in between Lassen Peak and Brokeoff Mountain that is thought to mark an area near the center of Tehama's now-gone cone. Other geothermal areas in the caldera are Little Hot Springs Valley, Diamond Point (an old lava conduit), and Bumpass Hell (see Geothermal areas in Lassen Volcanic National Park).
The magma that fuels the volcanoes in the park is derived from subduction off the coast of Northern California. Cinder Cone and the Fantastic Lava Beds, located about 10 miles (16km) northeast of Lassen Peak, is a cinder cone volcano and associated lava flow field that last erupted about 1650. It created a series of basaltic andesite to andesite lava flows known as the Fantastic Lava Beds.
There are four shield volcanoes in the park; Mount Harkness (southwest corner of the park), Red Mountain (at south-central boundary), Prospect Peak (in northeast corner), and Raker Peak (north of Lassen Peak). All of these volcanoes are 7,000–8,400 feet (2,133–2,560 m) above sea level and each is topped by a cinder cone volcano.
During ice ages, glaciers have modified and helped to erode the older volcanoes in the park. The center of snow accumulation and therefore ice radiation was Lassen Peak, Red Mountain, and Raker Peak. These volcanoes thus show more glacial scarring than other volcanoes in the park.
Despite not having any glaciers currently, Lassen Peak does have 14 permanent snowfields.[15]
Sunset from Lassen Peak; snowfields visible on left
Since the entire park is located at medium to high elevations, the park generally has cool-cold winters and warm summers below 7,500 feet (2,300m). Above this elevation, the climate is harsh and cold, with cool summer temperatures. Precipitation within the park is high to very high due to a lack of a rain shadow from the Coast Ranges. The park gets more precipitation than anywhere else in the Cascades south of the Three Sisters. Snowfall at the new visitor center near the southwest entrance at 6,700 feet (2,040m) is around 430 inches (1,100cm) despite facing east. Up around Lake Helen, at 8,200 feet (2,500m) the snowfall is around 600–700 inches (1,500–1,800cm), making it probably the snowiest place in California. In addition, Lake Helen gets more average snow accumulation than any other recording station located near a volcano in the Cascade range, with a maximum of 178 inches (450cm).[16] Snowbanks persist year-round.
Kings Creek with Lassen Peak on the horizon
Plants[edit]
Lying at the northern end of the Sierra Nevada forests ecoregion, Lassen Volcanic National Park preserves a landscape nearly as it existed before Euro-American settlement: its 27,130 acres (10,980ha) of old growth include all of its major forest types.[17][18]
At elevations below 6,500 feet the dominant vegetation community is the mixed conifer forest. Ponderosa and Jeffrey Pines, Sugar Pine, and White Fir form the forest canopy for this rich community that also includes species of manzanita, gooseberry, and ceanothus. Common wildflowers include iris, spotted coralroot, pyrola, violets, and lupin.[19]
Above the mixed-conifer forest is the major community of the Red Fir forest. Between elevations of 6,500 and 8,000 feet, Red Fir, Western White Pine, Mountain Hemlock, and Lodgepole Pine dominate a community less diverse than the mixed-conifer forest. Common plants include satin lupine, woolly mule's-ears and pinemat manzanita.[19]
Subalpine areas include the upper limit for the growth of standing trees. From 8,000 feet to treeline, plants are fewer in overall number with exposed patches of bare ground providing a harsh environment. Rock spirea, lupin, Indian paintbrush, and penstemon are a few of the rugged members of this community. Trees in this community include Whitebark Pine and Mountain Hemlock.[19]
Penstemons
Incense Cedar
Pinus ponderosa
Geology[edit]
Main article: Geology of the Lassen volcanic area
Lassen Peak from the summit of Brokeoff Mountain. Photo shows 1915 tongue of lava and Vulcan's Eye.
Formation of basement rocks[edit]
Cinder Cone from the Fantastic Lava Beds
Thermal vents at Sulfur Works
In the Cenozoic, uplifting and westward tilting of the Sierra Nevada along with extensive volcanism generated huge lahars (volcanic-derived mud flows) in the Pliocene which became the Tuscan Formation. This formation is not exposed anywhere in the national park but it is just below the surface in many areas.
Also in the Pliocene, basaltic flows erupted from vents and fissures in the southern part of the park. These and later flows covered increasingly large areas and built a lava plateau. In the later Pliocene and into the Pleistocene, these basaltic flows were covered by successive thick and fluid flows of andesite lava, which geologists call the Juniper lavas and the Twin Lakes lavas. The Twin Lakes lava is black, porphyritic and has abundant xenocrysts of quartz (see Cinder Cone).
Another group of andesite lava flows called the Flatiron, erupted during this time and covered the southwestern part of the park's area. The park by this time was a relatively featureless and large lava plain. Subsequently, the Eastern basalt flows erupted along the eastern boundary of what is now the park, forming low hills that were later eroded into rugged terrain.
Volcanoes rise[edit]
Lassen Peak as seen from Lake Helen
Lassen Peak from Devastated Area
Pyroclastic eruptions then started to pile tephra into cones in the northern area of the park.
Mount Tehama (also known as Brokeoff Volcano) rose as a stratovolcano in the southwestern corner of the park during the Pleistocene. It was made of roughly alternating layers of andesitic lavas and tephra (volcanic ash, breccia, and pumice) with increasing amounts of tephra with elevation. At its height, Tehama was probably about 11,000 feet (3,400m) high.
Approximately 350,000 years ago its cone collapsed into itself and formed a two-mile (3.2km) wide caldera after it emptied its throat and partially did the same to its magma chamber in a series of eruptions. One of these eruptions occurred where Lassen Peak now stands, and consisted of fluid, black, glassy dacite, which formed a layer 1,500 feet (460m) thick (outcroppings of which can be seen as columnar rock at Lassen's base).
During glacial periods (ice ages) of the present Wisconsinan glaciation, glaciers have modified and helped to erode the older volcanoes in the park, including the remains of Tehama. Many of these glacial features, deposits and scars, however, have been covered up by tephra and avalanches, or were destroyed by eruptions.
Roughly 27,000 years ago (older data gave an age of 18,000 years), Lassen Peak started to form as a dacite lava dome quickly pushed its way through Tehama's destroyed north-eastern flank. As the lava dome pushed its way up, it shattered overlaying rock, which formed a blanket of talus around the emerging volcano. Lassen rose and reached its present height in a relatively short time, probably in as little as a few years. Lassen Peak has also been partially eroded by Ice Age glaciers, at least one of which extended as much as 7 miles (11km) from the volcano itself.
Since then, smaller dacite domes formed around Lassen. The largest of these, Chaos Crags, is just north of Lassen Peak. Phreatic (steam explosion) eruptions, dacite and andesite lava flows and cinder cone formation have persisted into modern times.
Bumpass Hell contains boiling springs, mudpots, and fumaroles
There are active hot springs and mud pots in the Lassen area. Some of these springs are the site of occurrence of certain extremophile micro-organisms, that are capable of surviving in extremely hot environments.[20]
See also[edit]
1938 poster for Lassen Volcanic National Park
Chaos Crags
Geothermal areas in Lassen Volcanic National Park
Lassen Peak
List of nationally protected areas of the United States
National Register of Historic Places listings in Lassen Volcanic National Park
Volcanic Legacy Scenic Byway
Footnotes[edit]
^ "Listing of acreage as of December 31, 2011". Land Resource Division, National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-07.
^ "NPS Annual Recreation Visits Report". National Park Service. Retrieved 2013-05-28.
^ Topinka, Topink (May 11, 2005). "Lassen Peak Volcano, California". United States Geological Survey. Retrieved March 11, 2012.
^ Lee, Robert F (2001). "The Story of the Antiquities Act". Chapter 8: The Proclamation of National Monuments Under the Antiquities Act, 1906–1970
^ Lynch, David K. "Volcanoes and their relationship to plate tectonics". SanAndreasFault.org. Retrieved 2012-03-11.
^ Clynne, Michael A; Janik, Cathy J; Muffler, LJP. "Hot Water in Lassen Volcanic National Park: Fumaroles, Steaming Ground, and Boiling Mudpots" (PDF). United States Geological Survey. Retrieved 2012-03-11.
^ "HOTSPOT: California On The Edge: Cascade Range Volcanoes". California Academy of Sciencies. Retrieved 2012-03-11.
^ a b c d e Geology of National Parks, pp. 542–46.
^ Geology of U.S. Parklands, p. 154.
^ "NPS 2003 General Management Plan, Wilderness Zone" (PDF). Retrieved September 4, 2009.
^ USGS: Volcano Hazards of the Lassen Volcanic National Park Area, California
^ "Lassen Volcanic NP". National Park Service Public Use Statistics Office. Retrieved 2012-09-30.
^ "Public Use Reporting and Counting Instructions". Retrieved 2012-09-29.
^ a b "Geology Fieldnotes for Lassen Volcanic National Park California". Retrieved 2010-09-06.
^ "Glaciers Online". Archived from the original on March 5, 2007.
^ "Cascade Snow". Skimountaineer.com. Retrieved 2012-08-04.
^ Franklin, Jerry, F; Fites-Kaufmann, Jo Ann (1996). "Status of the Sierra Nevada, Ch. 21" (III: Biological and Physical Elements of the Sierra Nevada ed.). Sierra Nevada Ecosystem Project. Final Report to Congress: 627–671. Archived from the original on 2012-12-12.
^ Bolsinger, Charles L.; Waddell, Karen L. (1993). "Area of old-growth forests in California, Oregon, and Washington" (PDF). United States Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. Resource Bulletin PNW-RB-197.
^ a b c "Plants". United States National Park Service: Lassen Volcanic National Park. Retrieved January 13, 2009.
^ C.Michael Hogan. 2010. Extremophile. eds. E.Monosson and C.Cleveland. Encyclopedia of Earth. National Council for Science and the Environment, Washington DC
References[edit]
This article incorporatespublic domain material from websites or documents of the National Park Service.
Harris, Ann G.; Esther Tuttle, Sherwood D., Tuttle (2004). Geology of National Parks (6th ed.). Iowa: Kendall/Hunt Publishing. ISBN0-7872-9971-5.
Volcano Hazards of the Lassen Volcanic National Park Area, California, U.S. Geological Survey Fact Sheet 022-00, Online version 1.0 (adapted public domain text; accessed September 25, 2006)
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lassen Volcanic National Park.
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Lassen Volcanic National Park.
"Lassen Volcanic National Park". National Park Service. Retrieved 2011-05-21.
"Volcano Hazards of the Lassen Volcanic National Park Area". U.S. Geological Survey. Retrieved 2011-05-21.
"USGS: Geology of Lassen Volcanic National Park". U.S. Geological Survey. Retrieved 2011-05-21.
"Historic images of Lassen National Park". University of California. Retrieved 2011-05-21.
v
t
e
National parks of the United States
Acadia
American Samoa
Arches
Badlands
Big Bend
Biscayne
Black Canyon of the Gunnison
Bryce Canyon
Canyonlands
Capitol Reef
Carlsbad Caverns
Channel Islands
Congaree
Crater Lake
Cuyahoga Valley
Death Valley
Denali
Dry Tortugas
Everglades
Gates of the Arctic
Glacier
Glacier Bay
Grand Canyon
Grand Teton
Great Basin
Great Sand Dunes
Great Smoky Mountains
Guadalupe Mountains
Haleakalā
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes
Hot Springs
Isle Royale
Joshua Tree
Katmai
Kenai Fjords
Kings Canyon
Kobuk Valley
Lake Clark
Lassen Volcanic
Mammoth Cave
Mesa Verde
Mount Rainier
North Cascades
Olympic
Petrified Forest
Pinnacles
Redwood
Rocky Mountain
Saguaro
Sequoia
Shenandoah
Theodore Roosevelt
Virgin Islands
Voyageurs
Wind Cave
Wrangell–St. Elias
Yellowstone
Yosemite
Zion
List of national parks of the United States (by elevation)
v
t
e
Protected areas of California
National Park System
National Parks
Channel Islands
Death Valley
Joshua Tree
Kings Canyon
Lassen Volcanic
Pinnacles
Redwood
Sequoia
Yosemite
National Preserves
Mojave
National Monuments
Berryessa Snow Mountain
Cabrillo
Cesar E. Chavez
Devils Postpile
Fort Ord
Lava Beds
Muir Woods
World War II Valor in the Pacific
National Seashores
Point Reyes
National Historical Parks
Rosie the Riveter/World War II Home Front
San Francisco Maritime
National Historic Sites
Eugene O'Neill
Fort Point
John Muir
Manzanar
National Memorials
Port Chicago Naval Magazine
National Recreation Areas
Golden Gate
Santa Monica Mountains
Whiskeytown
State Parks
State Parks
Ahjumawi Lava Springs
Andrew Molera
Angel Island
Annadel
Año Nuevo
Anza-Borrego Desert
Arthur B. Ripley Desert Woodland
Bidwell–Sacramento River
Big Basin Redwoods
Border Field
Bothe-Napa Valley
Burton Creek
Butano
Calaveras Big Trees
Castle Crags
Castle Rock
Caswell Memorial
China Camp
Chino Hills
Clear Lake
Crystal Cove
Cuyamaca Rancho
D. L. Bliss
Del Norte Coast Redwoods
Donner Memorial
Ed Z'berg Sugar Pine Point
Emerald Bay
The Forest of Nisene Marks
Fort Ord Dunes
Fremont Peak
Garrapata
Gaviota
Great Valley Grasslands
Grizzly Creek Redwoods
Grover Hot Springs
Hearst San Simeon
Hendy Woods
Henry Cowell Redwoods
Henry W. Coe
Humboldt Lagoons
Humboldt Redwoods
Jedediah Smith Redwoods
Julia Pfeiffer Burns
Leo Carrillo
Limekiln
MacKerricher
Malibu Creek
Manchester
McArthur–Burney Falls Memorial
McLaughlin Eastshore
Mendocino Headlands
Mendocino Woodlands
Montaña de Oro
Morro Bay
Mount Diablo
Mount San Jacinto
Mount Tamalpais
Navarro River Redwoods
Pacheco
Palomar Mountain
Patrick's Point
Pfeiffer Big Sur
Placerita Canyon
Plumas-Eureka
Point Mugu
Portola Redwoods
Prairie Creek Redwoods
Red Rock Canyon
Richardson Grove
Rio de Los Angeles
Robert Louis Stevenson
Russian Gulch
Saddleback Butte
Salt Point
Samuel P. Taylor
San Bruno Mountain
Sinkyone Wilderness
South Yuba River
Sugarloaf Ridge
Sutter Buttes
Tolowa Dunes
Tomales Bay
Topanga
Van Damme
Washoe Meadows
Wilder Ranch
State
Natural Reserves
Antelope Valley California Poppy
Armstrong Redwoods
Azalea
Caspar Headlands
John B. Dewitt
John Little
Jug Handle
Kruse Rhododendron
Los Osos Oaks
Mailliard Redwoods
Mono Lake Tufa
Montgomery Woods
Point Lobos
Smithe Redwoods
Torrey Pines
Tule Elk
State
Marine Reserves
Albany
Emeryville Crescent
State
Historic Parks
Anderson Marsh
Antelope Valley Indian Museum
Bale Grist Mill
Benicia Capitol
Bidwell Mansion
Bodie
California Citrus
California State Indian Museum
Chumash Painted Cave
Colonel Allensworth
Columbia
Cowell Ranch/John Marsh
El Presidio de Santa Barbara
Empire Mine
Folsom Powerhouse
Fort Humboldt
Fort Ross
Fort Tejon
Governor's Mansion
Hearst San Simeon
Indian Grinding Rock
Jack London
La Purísima Mission
Leland Stanford Mansion
Los Angeles
Los Encinos
Malakoff Diggins
Marconi Conference Center
Marshall Gold Discovery
Monterey
Old Sacramento
Old Town San Diego
Olompali
Petaluma Adobe
Pigeon Point Light Station
Pío Pico
Point Sur
Railtown 1897
San Juan Bautista
San Pasqual Battlefield
Santa Cruz Mission
Santa Susana Pass
Shasta
Sonoma
Sutter's Fort
Tomo-Kahni
Wassama Round House
Watts Towers of Simon Rodia
Weaverville Joss House
Will Rogers
William B. Ide Adobe
Woodland Opera House
State Beaches
Asilomar
Bean Hollow
Bolsa Chica
Cardiff
Carlsbad
Carmel River
Carpinteria
Caspar Headlands
Cayucos
Corona del Mar
Dockweiler
Doheny
El Capitán
Emma Wood
Gray Whale Cove
Greenwood
Half Moon Bay
Huntington
Leucadia
Lighthouse Field
Little River
Malibu Lagoon
Mandalay
Manresa
Marina
McGrath
Montara
Monterey
Moonlight
Morro Strand
Moss Landing
Natural Bridges
New Brighton
Pacifica
Pelican
Pescadero
Pismo
Point Dume
Point Sal
Pomponio
Refugio
Robert H. Meyer Memorial
Robert W. Crown Memorial
Salinas River
San Buenaventura
San Clemente
San Elijo
San Gregorio
San Onofre
Santa Monica
Schooner Gulch
Seacliff
Silver Strand
Sonoma Coast
South Carlsbad
Sunset
Thornton
Torrey Pines
Trinidad
Twin Lakes
Westport-Union Landing
Will Rogers
William Randolph Hearst Memorial
Zmudowski
State
Recreation Areas
Admiral William Standley
Auburn
Austin Creek
Benbow Lake
Benicia
Bethany Reservoir
Brannan Island
Candlestick Point
Castaic Lake
Colusa-Sacramento River
Folsom Lake
Franks Tract
George J. Hatfield
Harry A. Merlo
Kenneth Hahn
Kings Beach
Lake Del Valle
Lake Oroville
Lake Perris
Lake Valley
Martial Cottle Park
McConnell
Millerton Lake
Picacho
Providence Mountains
Salton Sea
San Luis Reservoir
Silverwood Lake
Standish-Hickey
Tahoe
Turlock Lake
Woodson Bridge
State Vehicular
Recreation Areas
Carnegie
Clay Pit
Heber Dunes
Hollister Hills
Hungry Valley
Oceano Dunes
Ocotillo Wells
Prairie City
Other
Burleigh H. Murray Ranch
California State Mining and Mineral Museum
California State Capitol Museum
California State Railroad Museum
Castro Adobe
Delta Meadows
Estero Bay
Hatton Canyon
Indio Hills Palms
Point Cabrillo Light Station
Point Lobos Ranch
Point Montara Light Station
Reynolds Wayside Campground
San Timoteo Canyon
Stone Lake
Verdugo Mountains
Ward Creek
Wildwood Canyon
National Forests and Grasslands
National Forests
and Grasslands
Angeles
Butte Valley NG
Cleveland
Eldorado
Humboldt-Toiyabe
Inyo
Klamath
Lake Tahoe Basin
Lassen
Los Padres
Mendocino
Modoc
Plumas
Rogue River – Siskiyou
San Bernardino
Sequoia
Shasta–Trinity
Sierra
Six Rivers
Stanislaus
Tahoe
National Wilderness
Preservation System
Agua Tibia
Ansel Adams
Bucks Lake
Caribou
Carson-Iceberg
Castle Crags
Cucamonga
Desolation
Dick Smith
Dinkey Lakes
Emigrant
Golden Trout
Hoover
Inyo Mountains
Ishi
Jennie Lakes
John Muir
Kaiser
Marble Mountain
Mokelumne
Mount Shasta Wilderness
North Fork
San Gabriel
Sanhedrin
San Jacinto
San Rafael
Sespe
Siskiyou
Snow Mountain
South Fork Eel River
South Sierra
South Warner
Thousand Lakes
Trinity Alps
Ventana
Yolla Bolly–Middle Eel
Yuki
Other
Giant Sequoia National Monument
San Gabriel Mountains National Monument
Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Mountains National Monument
Smith River National Recreation Area
Shasta–Trinity National Recreation Area
State Forests
Boggs Mountain Demonstration
Ellen Pickett
Jackson Demonstration
Las Posadas
LaTour Demonstration
Mount Zion
Mountain Home Demonstration
Soquel Demonstration
National Wildlife Refuges
Antioch Dunes
Bitter Creek
Blue Ridge
Butte Sink
Castle Rock
Clear Lake
Coachella Valley
Colusa
Delevan
Don Edwards San Francisco Bay
Ellicott Slough
Farallon
Guadalupe-Nipomo Dunes
Hopper Mountain
Humboldt Bay
Kern
Lower Klamath
Marin Islands
Merced
Modoc
Pixley
Sacramento
Sacramento River
Salinas River
San Diego Bay
San Diego
San Joaquin River
San Luis
San Pablo Bay
Seal Beach
Sonny Bono Salton Sea
Stone Lakes
Sutter
Tijuana Slough
Tule Lake
State Wildlife Areas
Wildlife
Areas
Antelope Valley
Ash Creek
Bass Hill
Battle Creek
Big Lagoon
Big Sandy
Biscar
Butte Valley
Buttermilk Country
Cache Creek
Camp Cady
Cantara/Ney Springs
Cedar Roughs
Cinder Flats
Collins Eddy
Colusa Bypass
Coon Hollow
Cottonwood Creek
Crescent City Marsh
Crocker Meadows
Daugherty Hill
Decker Island
Doyle
Dutch Flat
Eastlker River
Eel River
Elk Creek Wetlands
Elk River
Fay Slough
Feather River
Fitzhugh Creek
Fremont Weir
Grass Lake
Gray Lodge
Green Creek
Grizzly Island
Hallelujah Junction
Heenan Lake
Hill Slough
Hollenbeck Canyon
Honey Lake
Hope Valley
Horseshoe Ranch
Imperial
Indian Valley
Kelso Peak and Old Dad Mountains
Kinsman Flat
Knoxville
Laguna
Lake Berryessa
Lake Earl
Lake Sonoma
Little Panoche Reservoir
Los Banos
Lower Sherman Island
Mad River Slough
Marble Mountains
Mendota
Merrill's Landing
Miner Slough
Monache Meadows
Morro Bay
Moss Landing
Mouth of Cottonwood Creek
Napa-Sonoma Marshes
North Grasslands
O'Neill Forebay
Oroville
Petaluma Marsh
Pickel Meadow
Pine Creek
Point Edith
Putah Creek
Rector Reservoir
Red Lake
Rhode Island
Sacramento River
San Felipe Valley
San Jacinto
San Luis Obispo
San Luis Reservoir
San Pablo Bay
Santa Rosa
Shasta Valley
Silver Creek
Slinkard/Little Antelope
Smithneck Creek
South Fork
Spenceville
Surprise Valley
Sutter Bypass
Tehama
Truckee River
Upper Butte Basin
Volta
Warner Valley
Waukell Creek
West Hilmar
Westlker River
White Slough
Willow Creek
Yolo Bypass
Ecological
Reserves
Albany Mudflats
Alkali Sink
Allensworth
Atascadero Creek Marsh
Bair Island
Baldwin Lake
Batiquitos Lagoon
Blue Sky
Boden Canyon
Boggs Lake
Bolsa Chica
Bonny Doon
Buena Vista Lagoon
Butler Slough
Butte Creek Canyon
Butte Creek House
Buttonwillow
By Day Creek
Calhoun Cut
Canebrake
Carlsbad Highlands
Carmel Bay
Carrizo Canyon
Carrizo Plains
China Point
Clover Creek
Coachella Valley
Coal Canyon
Corte Madera Marsh
Crestridge
Dairy Mart Ponds
Dales Lake
Del Mar Landing
Eden Landing
Elkhorn Slough
Estelle Mountain
Fall River Mills
Fish Slough
Fremont Valley
Goleta Slough
Indian Joe Spring
Kaweah
Kerman
King Clone
Laguna Laurel
Loch Lomond Vernal Pool
Lokern
Magnesia Spring
Marin Islands
Mattole River
McGinty Mountain
Morro Dunes
Morro Rock
Napa River
North Table Mountain
Oasis Spring
Panoche Hills
Peytonia Slough
Pine Hill
Piute Creek
Pleasant Valley
Rancho Jamul
Redwood Shores
River Springs Lakes
Saline Valley
San Dieguito Lagoon
San Elijo Lagoon
San Felipe Creek
San Joaquin River
Santa Rosa Plateau
Springville
Stone Corral
Sycamore Canyon
Sycuan Peak
Thomes Creek
Tomales Bay
Upper Newport Bay
Watsonville Slough
West Mojave Desert
Woodbridge
Yaudanchi
Marine
Protected
Areas
Abalone Cove
Albany Mudflats
Anacapa
Anacapa
Año Nuevo
Asilomar
Atascadero Beach
Bair Island
Batiquitos Lagoon
Big Creek
Big Creek
Big Sycamore Canyon
Bodega
Bolsa Chica
Cambria
Cardiff and San Elijo
Carmel Bay
Carmel Pinnacles
Carrington Point
Catalina Marine Science Center
Corte Madera Marsh
Crystal Cove
Dana Point
Del Mar Landing
Doheny
Doheny
Duxbury Reef
Edward F. Ricketts
Elkhorn Slough
Elkhorn Slough
Encinitas
Estero de Limantour
Fagan Marsh
Farallon Islands
Farnsworth Bank
Fort Ross
Gerstle Cove
Goleta Slough
Greyhound Rock
Gull Island
Harris Point
Heisler Park
Hopkins
Irvine Coast
James V. Fitzgerald
Judith Rock
Julia Pfeiffer Burns
La Jolla
Laguna Beach
Lovers Cove (Catalina Island)
Lovers Point
MacKerricher
Manchester and Arena Rock
Marin Islands
Mia J. Tegner
Moro Cojo Slough
Morro Bay
Morro Bay
Morro Beach
Natural Bridges
Niguel
Pacific Grove Marine Gardens
Painted Cave
Peytonia Slough
Piedras Blancas
Piedras Blancas
Pismo
Pismo-Oceano Beach
Point Buchon
Point Buchon
Point Cabrillo
Point Fermin
Point Lobos
Point Reyes Headlands
Point Sur
Point Sur
Portuguese Ledge
Punta Gorda
Redwood Shores
Refugio
Richardson Rock
Robert E. Badham
Robert W. Crown
Russian Gulch
Russian River
Salt Point
San Diego-Scripps
San Dieguito Lagoon
San Elijo Lagoon
Santa Barbara Island
Scorpion
Skunk Point
Sonoma Coast
Soquel Canyon
South Laguna Beach
South Point
Swami’s
Tomales Bay
Upper Newport Bay
Van Damme
Vandenberg
White Rock (Cambria)
National Landscape Conservation System
National Monuments
California Coastal
Carrizo Plain
Fort Ord
Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Mountains
National
Conservation Areas
California Desert
King Range
Wilderness Areas
Argus Range
Big Maria Mountains
Bigelow Cholla Garden
Bighorn Mountain
Black Mountain
Bright Star
Bristol Mountains
Cadiz Dunes
Carrizo Gorge
Chemehuevi Mountains
Chimney Peak
Chuckwalla Mountains
Chumash
Cleghorn Lakes
Clipper Mountain
Coso Range
Coyote Mountains
Darwin Falls
Dead Mountains
Dick Smith
El Paso Mountains
Fish Creek Mountains
Funeral Mountains
Golden Valley
Grass Valley
Headwaters Forest Reserve
Hollow Hills
Ibex
Indian Pass
Inyo Mountains
Jacumba
Kelso Dunes
Kiavah
Kingston Range
Little Chuckwalla Mountains
Little Picacho
Machesna Mountain
Matilija
Malpais Mesa
Manly Peak
Mecca Hills
Mesquite
Newberry Mountains
Nopah Range
North Algodones Dunes
North Mesquite Mountains
Old Woman Mountains
Orocopia Mountains
Otay Mountain
Owens Peak
Pahrump Valley
Palen/McCoy
Palo Verde Mountains
Picacho Peak
Piper Mountain
Piute Mountains
Red Buttes
Resting Spring Range
Rice Valley
Riverside Mountains
Rodman Mountains
Sacatar Trail
Saddle Peak Hills
San Gorgonio
Santa Lucia
Santa Rosa
Sawtooth Mountains
Sespe
Sheephole Valley
South Nopah Range
Stateline
Stepladder Mountains
Surprise Canyon
Sylvania Mountains
Trilobite
Turtle Mountains
Whipple Mountains
National Marine Sanctuaries
Channel Islands
Cordell Bank
Greater Farallones
Monterey Bay
National Estuarine Research Reserves
Elkhorn Slough
San Francisco Bay
Tijuana River Estuary
University of California Natural Reserve System
Angelo Coast Range Reserve
Año Nuevo Island
Blue Oak Ranch Reserve
Bodega Marine
Box Springs
Boyd Deep Canyon Desert Research Center
Burns Piñon Ridge
Carpinteria Salt Marsh
Chickering American River
Coal Oil Point
Dawson Los Monos Canyon
Eagle Lake Field Station
Elliott Chaparral
Emerson Oaks
Fort Ord
Hastings
James San Jacinto Mountains
Jenny Pygmy Forest
Jepson Prairie
Kendall-Frost Mission Bay Marsh
Kenneth S. Norris Rancho Marino
Landels-Hill Big Creek
McLaughlin
Motte Rimrock
Quail Ridge
Sagehen Creek Field Station
San Joaquin Freshwater Marsh
Santa Cruz Island
Scripps Coastal
Sedgwick
Stebbins Cold Canyon
Steele Burnand Anza-Borrego
Stunt Ranch Santa Monica Mountains
Sweeney Granite Mountains Desert Research Center
Valentine Eastern Sierra
Younger Lagoon
Heritage registers
World Heritage Sites
World Network of Biosphere Reserves
National Register of Historic Places
National Historic Landmarks
National Natural Landmarks
California Historical Landmarks
California Points of Historical Interest
California Register of Historical Resources
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lassen_Volcanic_National_Park&amp;oldid=703288215"					
				Categories: IUCN Category IILassen Volcanic National ParkNational parks in CaliforniaVolcanoes of CaliforniaParks in Lassen County, CaliforniaParks in Plumas County, CaliforniaParks in Shasta County, CaliforniaParks in Tehama County, CaliforniaHot springs of CaliforniaProtected areas established in 1916Lassen National ForestProtected areas established in 19071907 establishments in California1916 establishments in CaliforniaBodies of water of Lassen County, CaliforniaBodies of water of Plumas County, CaliforniaBodies of water of Shasta County, CaliforniaBodies of water of Tehama County, CaliforniaHidden categories: Use mdy dates from February 2013Coordinates on WikidataWikipedia articles incorporating text from the National Park Service				
			Navigation menu
						Personal tools
							Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in						
						Namespaces
															Article
															Talk
							Variants
						Views
															Read
															Edit
															View history
						More
							Search
			Navigation
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
			Interaction
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
			Tools
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
			Print/export
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
			Languages
						БългарскиCatalàDanskDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançaisHrvatskiItalianoNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålPolskiPortuguêsРусскийSuomiSvenskaTürkçe中文					
				Edit links			
											 This page was last modified on 4 February 2016, at 16:42.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Mobile view
											Developers
											Cookie statement

