Mesa Verde National Park - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
			Mesa Verde National Park
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
				"Mesa Verde" redirects here. For other uses, see Mesa Verde (disambiguation).
Mesa Verde National Park
IUCN category II (national park)
Mesa Verde from the northeast
Location
Montezuma County, Colorado,
United States,
North America
Nearestcity
Mancos, Colorado
Coordinates
37°11′02″N 108°29′19″W﻿ / ﻿37.183784°N 108.488687°W﻿ / 37.183784; -108.488687Coordinates: 37°11′02″N 108°29′19″W﻿ / ﻿37.183784°N 108.488687°W﻿ / 37.183784; -108.488687
Area
52,485 acres (21,240ha)
Established
June29,1906(1906-06-29)
Visitors
572,329 (in2011)[1]
Governingbody
National Park Service
UNESCO World Heritage Site
Type
Cultural
Criteria
iii
Designated
1978 (2nd session)
Referenceno.
27
State Party
United States
Region
Europe and North America
U.S. National Register of Historic Places
Designated
October 15, 1966
Referenceno.
66000251
Mesa Verde National Park is a National Park and World Heritage Site located in Montezuma County, Colorado. It protects some of the best preserved Ancestral Puebloan archeological sites in the United States.
The park was created by President Theodore Roosevelt in 1906. It occupies 52,485 acres (21,240ha) near the Four Corners region of the American Southwest, and with more than 4,300 sites, including 600 cliff dwellings, it is the largest archeological preserve in the US. Mesa Verde (Spanish for "green table") is best known for structures such as Cliff Palace, thought to be the largest cliff dwelling in North America.
Starting c. 7500 BCE, Mesa Verde was seasonally inhabited by a group of nomadic Paleo-Indians known as the Foothills Mountain Complex. The variety of projectile points found in the region indicates they were influenced by surrounding areas, including the Great Basin, the San Juan Basin, and the Rio Grande Valley. Later, Archaic people established semi-permanent rockshelters in and around the mesa. By 1000 BCE, the Basketmaker culture emerged from the local Archaic population, and by 750 CE the Ancestral Puebloans had developed from the Basketmaker culture.
The Mesa Verdeans survived using a combination of hunting, gathering, and subsistence farming of crops such as corn, beans, and squash. They built the mesa's first pueblos sometime after 650, and by the end of the 12th century they began to construct the massive cliff dwellings for which the park is best known. By 1285, following a period of social and environmental instability driven by a series of severe and prolonged droughts, they abandoned the area and moved south to locations in Arizona and New Mexico, including Rio Chama, Pajarito Plateau, and Santa Fe.
Contents
1 Inhabitants
1.1 Paleo-Indians
1.2 Archaic
1.3 Basketmaker culture
1.4 Ancestral Puebloans
1.4.1 Pueblo I: 750 to 900
1.4.2 Pueblo II: 900 to 1150
1.4.3 Pueblo III: 1150 to 1300
1.4.4 Warfare
1.4.5 Migration
1.4.6 Organization
1.4.7 Architecture
1.4.8 Astronomy
1.4.9 Agriculture and water-control systems
1.4.10 Hunting and foraging
1.4.11 Pottery
1.4.12 Rock art and murals
2 Anthropogenic ecology, geography, and climate
3 Geology
4 Rediscovery
4.1 The Wetherills
4.2 Gustaf Nordenskiöld
5 National Park
5.1 Excavation and protection
5.2 Services
5.3 Wildfires and culturally modified trees
5.4 Ute Mountain Tribal Park
6 Key sites
6.1 Balcony House
6.2 Cliff Palace
6.3 Long House
6.4 Mug, Oak Tree, Spruce Tree, and Square Tower houses
7 References
8 External links
Inhabitants[edit]
Paleo-Indians[edit]
Paleo-Indians hunting a glyptodont, by Heinrich Harder c. 1920
The first occupants of the Mesa Verde region, which spans from southeastern Utah to northwestern New Mexico, were nomadic Paleo-Indians who arrived in the area c. 9500 BCE.[2] They followed herds of big game and camped near rivers and streams, many of which dried up as the glaciers that once covered parts of the San Juan Mountains receded. The earliest Paleo-Indians were the Clovis culture and Folsom tradition, defined largely by the way in which they fashioned projectile points. Although they left evidence of their presence throughout the region, there is little indication that they lived in central Mesa Verde during this time.[3]
After 9600 BCE, the area's environment grew warmer and drier, which brought pine forests and the animals that thrive in them to central Mesa Verde. Paleo-Indians began inhabiting the mesa in increasing numbers c. 7500, though it is unclear whether they were seasonal occupants or year-round residents. Development of the atlatl during this period made it easier for them to hunt smaller game, a crucial advance at a time when most of the region's big game had disappeared from the landscape.[4]
Archaic[edit]
Archaic pictographs, c. 2500 BCE, Sego Canyon, Utah
6000 BCE marks the beginning of the Archaic period in North America. Archeologists differ as to the origin of the Mesa Verde Archaic population; some believe they developed exclusively from local Paleo-Indians, called the Foothills Mountain Complex, but others suggest that the variety of projectile points found in Mesa Verde indicates influence from surrounding areas, including the Great Basin, the San Juan Basin, and the Rio Grande Valley. The Archaic people probably developed locally, but were also influenced by contact, trade, and intermarriage with immigrants from these outlying areas.[5]
The early Archaic people living near Mesa Verde utilized the atlatl and harvested a wider variety of plants and animals than the Paleo-Indians had, while retaining their primarily nomadic lifestyle. They inhabited the outlying areas of the Mesa Verde region, but also the mountains, mesa tops, and canyons, where they created rockshelters and rock art, and left evidence of animal processing and chert knapping. Environmental stability during the period drove population expansion and migration. Major warming and drying from 5000 to 2500 might have led middle Archaic people to seek the cooler climate of Mesa Verde, whose higher elevation brought increased snowpack that, when coupled with spring rains, provided relatively plentiful amounts of water.[5]
By the late Archaic more people were living in semi-permanent rockshelters that preserved perishable goods such as baskets, sandals, and mats. They started to make a variety of twig figurines that usually resembled sheep or deer. The late Archaic is marked by increased trade in exotic materials such as obsidian and turquoise. Marine shells and abalone from the Pacific coast made their way to Mesa Verde from Arizona, and the Archaic people worked them into necklaces and pendants. Rock art flourished, and people lived in rudimentary houses made of mud and wood. Their early attempts at plant domestication eventually developed into the sustained agriculture that marked the end of the Archaic period, c. 1000.[6]
Basketmaker culture[edit]
Basketmaker II basket, c. 1 to 500
With the introduction of corn to the Mesa Verde region c. 1000 BCE and the trend away from nomadism toward permanent pithouse settlements, the Archaic Mesa Verdeans transitioned into what archeologists call the Basketmaker culture. Basketmaker II people are characterized by their combination of foraging and farming skills, use of the atlatl, and creation of finely woven baskets in the absence of earthen pottery. By 300, corn had become the preeminent staple of the Basketmaker II people's diet, which relied less and less on wild food sources and more on domesticated crops.[7][a]
In addition to the fine basketry for which they were named, Basketmaker II people fashioned a variety of household items from plant and animal materials, including sandals, robes, pouches, mats, and blankets. They also made clay pipes and gaming pieces. Basketmaker men were relatively short and muscular, averaging less than 5.5 feet (1.7m) tall. Their skeletal remains reveal signs of hard labor and extensive travel, including degenerative joint disease, healed fractures, and moderate anemia associated with iron deficiency. They buried the dead near or amongst their settlements, and often included luxury items as gifts, which might indicate differences in relative social status. Basketmaker II people are also known for their distinctive rock art, which can be found throughout Mesa Verde. They depicted animals and people, in both abstract and realistic forms, in single works and more elaborate panels. A common subject was the hunchbacked flute player that the Hopi call Kokopelli.[9]
Basketmaker III basket, c. 450 to 750
By 500 CE atlatls were being supplanted by the bow and arrow and baskets by pottery, marking the end of the Basketmaker II Era and the beginning of the Basketmaker III Era.[10] Ceramic vessels were a major improvement over pitch-lined baskets, gourds, and animal hide containers, which had been the primary water storage containers in the region. Pottery also protected seeds against mold, insects, and rodents. By 600, Mesa Verdeans were using clay pots to cook soups and stews.[11] Year-round settlements first appear around this time. The population of the San Juan Basin increased markedly after 575, when there were very few Basketmaker III sites in Mesa Verde; by the early 7th century there were many such sites in the mesa. For the next 150 years villages typically consisted of small groups of one to three residences. The population of Mesa Verde c. 675 was approximately 1,000 to 1,500 people.[12]
Beans and new varieties of corn were introduced to the region c. 700.[13] By 775, some settlements had grown to accommodate more than one hundred people; the construction of large, above ground storage buildings began around this time. Basketmakers endeavored to store enough food for their family for one year, but also retained residential mobility so they could quickly relocate their dwellings in the event of resource depletion or consistently inadequate crop yields.[12] By the end of the 8th century, the smaller hamlets, which were typically occupied for ten to forty years, had been supplanted by larger ones that saw continuous occupation for as many as two generations.[14] Basketmaker III people established a tradition of holding large ceremonial gatherings near community pit structures.[15]
Ancestral Puebloans[edit]
Main article: Ancestral Puebloans
Pueblo I: 750 to 900[edit]
Main article: Pueblo I Period
Major Ancestral Puebloan settlements in the San Juan Basin
Pueblo I protokiva on Chapin Mesa, Mesa Verde National Park
750 marks the end of the Basketmaker III Era and the beginning of the Pueblo I period. The transition is characterized by major changes in the design and construction of buildings and the organization of household activities. Pueblo I people doubled their capacity for food storage from one year to two and built interconnected, year-round residences called pueblos. Many household activities that had previously been reserved for subterranean pithouses were moved to these above-ground dwellings. This altered the function of pithouses from all-purpose spaces to ones used primarily for community ceremonies, although they continued to house large extended families, particularly during winter months.[16] During the late 8th century, Mesa Verdeans began building square pit structures that archeologists call protokivas. They were typically 3 or 4 feet (0.91 or 1.22m) deep and 12 to 20 feet (3.7 to 6.1m) wide.[17]
The first pueblos appeared at Mesa Verde sometime after 650; by 850 more than half of Mesa Verdeans lived in them. As local populations grew, Puebloans found it difficult to survive on hunting, foraging, and gardening, which made them increasingly reliant on domesticated corn. This shift from semi-nomadism to a "sedentary and communal way of life changed ancestral Pueblo society forever".[18] Within a generation the average number of households in these settlements grew from one to three to fifteen to twenty, with average populations of two hundred people. Population density increased dramatically, with as many as a dozen families occupying roughly the same space that had formerly housed two. This brought increased security against raids and encouraged greater cooperation amongst residents. It also facilitated trade and intermarriage between clans, and by the late 8th century, as Mesa Verde's population was being augmented by settlers from the south, four distinct cultural groups occupied the same villages.[19]
Large Pueblo I settlements laid claim to the resources found within 15 to 30 square miles (39 to 78km2). They were typically organized in groups of at least three and spaced about 1 mile (1.6km) apart. By 860, there were approximately 8,000 people living in Mesa Verde.[20] Within the plazas of larger villages, the Pueblo I people dug massive pit structures of 800 square feet (74m2) that became central gathering places. These structures represent early architectural expressions of what would eventually develop into the Pueblo II Era great houses of Chaco Canyon. Despite robust growth during the early and mid-9th century, unpredictable rainfall and periodic drought led to a dramatic reversal of settlement trends in the area. Many late Pueblo I villages were abandoned after less than forty years of occupation, and by 880 Mesa Verde's population was in steady decline.[21] The beginning of the 10th century saw widespread depopulation of the region, as people emigrated south of the San Juan River to Chaco Canyon in search of reliable rains for farming.[22] As Mesa Verdeans migrated south, to where many of their ancestors had emigrated two hundred years before, the influence of Chaco Canyon grew, and by 950 Chaco had supplanted Mesa Verde as the region's cultural center.[21]
Pueblo II: 900 to 1150[edit]
Main article: Pueblo II Period
Square Tower House
The Pueblo II Period is marked by the growth and outreach of communities centered around the great houses of Chaco Canyon. Despite their participation in the vast Chacoan system, Mesa Verdeans retained a distinct cultural identity while melding regional innovation with ancient tradition, inspiring further architectural advancements; the 9th century Mesa Verdean pueblos influenced two hundred years of Chacoan great house construction.[22] Droughts during the late 9th century rendered Mesa Verdean dry land farming unreliable, which led to their growing crops only near drainages for the next 150 years. Crop yields returned to healthy levels by the early 11th century.[23] By 1050 the population of the area began to rebound; as agricultural prosperity increased, people immigrated to Mesa Verde from the south. [22]
Mesa Verdean farmers increasingly relied on masonry reservoirs during the Pueblo II Era. During the 11th century, they built check dams and terraces near drainages and slopes in an effort to conserve soil and runoff. These fields offset the danger of crop failures in the larger dry land fields.[24] By the mid-10th and early 11th centuries, protokivas had evolved into smaller circular structures called kivas, which were usually 12 to 15 feet (3.7 to 4.6m) across. These Mesa Verde-style kivas included a feature from earlier times called a sipapu, which is a hole dug in the north of the chamber that symbolizes the Ancestral Puebloan's place of emergence from the underworld.[17] At this time, Mesa Verdeans began to move away from the post and mud jacal-style buildings that marked the Pueblo I Period toward masonry construction, which had been utilized in the region as early as 700, but was not widespread until the 11th and 12th centuries.[25]
The expansion of Chacoan influence in the Mesa Verde area left its most visible mark in the form of Chaco-style masonry great houses that became the focal point of many Mesa Verdean villages after 1075.[22] Far View House, the largest of these, is considered a classic Chaco "outlier," on which construction likely began between 1075 and 1125, although some archaeologists argue that it was begun as early as 1020.[26] The era's timber and earth unit pueblos were typically inhabited for about twenty years.[27] During the early 12th century, the locus of regional control shifted away from Chaco to Aztec, New Mexico, in the southern Mesa Verde region.[22][b] By 1150, drought had once again stressed the region's inhabitants, leading to a temporary cessation of great house construction at Mesa Verde.[29]
Pueblo III: 1150 to 1300[edit]
Main article: Pueblo III Period
Cliff Palace is the largest cliff dwelling in Mesa Verde National Park.[30]
A severe drought from 1130 to 1180 led to rapid depopulation in many parts of the San Juan Basin, particularly at Chaco Canyon. As the extensive Chacoan system collapsed, people increasingly migrated to Mesa Verde, causing major population growth in the area. This led to much larger settlements of six to eight hundred people, which reduced mobility for Mesa Verdeans, who had in the past frequently relocated their dwellings and fields as part of their agriculture strategy. In order to sustain these larger populations, they dedicated more and more of their labor to farming. Population increases also led to expanded tree felling that reduced habitat for many wild plant and animal species that the Mesa Verdeans had relied on, further deepening their dependency on domesticated crops that were susceptible to drought-related failure.[31]
The Chacoan system brought large quantities of imported goods to Mesa Verde during the late 11th and early 12th centuries, including pottery, shells, and turquoise, but by the late 12th century, as the system collapsed, the amount of goods imported by the mesa quickly declined, and Mesa Verde became isolated from the surrounding region.[32] For approximately six hundred years, most Mesa Verdean farmers had lived in small, mesa-top homesteads of one or two families. They were typically located near their fields and walking distance to sources of water. This practice continued into the mid- to late 12th century, but by the start of the 13th century they began living in canyon locations that were close to water sources and within walking distance of their fields.[33]
Mesa Verdean villages thrived during the mid-Pueblo III Era, when architects constructed massive, multi-story buildings, and artisans adorned pottery with increasingly elaborate designs. Structures built during this period have been described as "among the world's greatest archaeological treasures".[34] Pueblo III masonry buildings were typically occupied for approximately fifty years, more than double the usable lifespan of the Pueblo II jacal structures. Others were continuously inhabited for two hundred years or more. Architectural innovations such as towers and multi-walled structures also appear during the Pueblo III Era. Mesa Verde's population remained fairly stable during the 12th century drought.[35] At the start of the 13th century, approximately 22,000 people lived there.[36] The area saw moderate population increases during the following decades, and dramatic ones from 1225 to 1260.[28] Most of the people in the region lived in the plains west of the mesa at locations such as Yellow Jacket Pueblo, near Cortez, Colorado.[37] Others colonized canyon rims and slopes in multi-family structures that grew to unprecedented size as populations swelled.[38] By 1260, the majority of Mesa Verdeans lived in large pueblos that housed several families and more than one hundred people.[33]
The 13th century saw 69 years of below average rainfall in the Mesa Verde region, and after 1270 the area suffered from especially cold temperatures. Dendrochronology indicates that the last tree felled for construction on the mesa was cut in 1281.[39] There was a major decline in ceramic imports to the region during this time, but local production remained steady.[40] Despite challenging conditions, the Puebloans continued to farm the area until a severely dry period from 1276 to 1299 ended seven hundred years of continuous human occupation at Mesa Verde.[23] Archeologists refer to this period as the "Great Drought".[41] The last inhabitants of the mesa left the area c. 1285.[42]
Warfare[edit]
Oak Tree House
During the Pueblo III period (1150 to 1300), Mesa Verdeans built numerous stone masonry towers that likely served as defensive structures. They often incorporated hidden tunnels connecting the towers to associated kivas.[43] Warfare was conducted using the same tools the Mesa Verdeans used for hunting game, including bows and arrows, stone axes, and wooden clubs and spears. They also crafted hide and basket shields that were used only during battles.[44] Periodic warfare occurred on the mesa throughout the 13th century.[28] Civic leaders in the region likely attained power and prestige by distributing food during times of drought. This system probably broke down during the "Great Drought", leading to intense warfare between competing clans.[45] Increasing economic and social uncertainty during the century's final decades led to widespread conflict. Evidence of partly burned villages and post-mortem trauma has been uncovered, and the residents of one village appear to have been the victims of a site-wide massacre.[46]
Evidence of violence and cannibalism has been documented in the central Mesa Verde region.[47][c] While most of the violence, which peaked between 1275 and 1285, is generally ascribed to in-fighting amongst Mesa Verdeans, archeological evidence found at Sand Canyon Pueblo, in Canyons of the Ancients National Monument, suggests that violent interactions also occurred between Mesa Verdeans and people from outside the region.[28] Evidence of the attacks was discovered by members of the Crow Canyon Archaeological Center during the 1990s. The assaults, which also occurred at the national monument's Castle Rock Pueblo, were dated to c. 1280, and are considered to have effectively ended several centuries of Puebloan occupation at those sites.[48] Many of the victims showed signs of skull fractures, and the uniformity of the injuries suggest that most were inflicted with a small stone axe. Others were scalped, dismembered, and cannibalized. The anthropophagy (cannibalism) might have been undertaken as a survival strategy during times of starvation.[49] The archeological record indicates that, rather than being isolated to the Mesa Verde region, violent conflict was widespread in North America during the late 13th and early 14th centuries, and was likely exacerbated by global climate changes that negatively affected food supplies throughout the continent.[50]
Migration[edit]
The Mesa Verde region saw unusually cold and dry conditions during the beginning of the 13th century. This might have driven emigration to Mesa Verde from less hospitable locations. The added population stressed the mesa's environment, further straining an agricultural society that was suffering from drought.[51] The region's bimodal precipitation pattern, which brought rainfall during spring and summer and snowfall during autumn and winter, began to fail post-1250.[41] After 1260, there was a rapid depopulation of Mesa Verde, as "tens of thousands of people" emigrated or died from starvation.[28] Many smaller communities in the Four Corners region were also abandoned during this period.[52][53] The Ancestral Puebloans had a long history of migration in the face of environmental instability, but the depopulation of Mesa Verde at the end of the 13th century was different in that the region was almost completely emptied, and no descendants returned to build permanent settlements.[54] While drought, resource depletion, and overpopulation all contributed to instability during the last two centuries of Ancestral Puebloan occupation, their overdependence on maize crops is considered the "fatal flaw" of their subsistence strategy.[55][d]
The vacating Mesa Verdeans left almost no direct evidence of their migration, but they left behind household goods, including cooking utensils, tools, and clothing, which gave archeologists the impression that the emigration was haphazard or hurried. An estimated 20,000 people lived in the region during the 13th century, but by the start of the 14th century the area was nearly uninhabited.[58][e] Many emigrants relocated to southern Arizona and New Mexico.[59] Although the rate of settlement is unclear, increases in sparsely populated areas, such as Rio Chama, Pajarito Plateau, and Santa Fe, correspond directly with the period of migration from Mesa Verde. Archeologists believe the Mesa Verdeans who settled in the areas near the Rio Grande, where Mesa Verde black-on-white pottery became widespread during the 14th century, were likely related to the households they joined and not unwelcome intruders. Archeologists view this migration as a continuation, versus a dissolution, of Ancestral Puebloan society and culture.[60] Many others relocated to the banks of the Little Colorado River, in western New Mexico and eastern Arizona.[61] While archeologists tend to focus on the "push" factors that drove the Mesa Verdeans away from the region, there were also several environmental "pull factors", such as warmer temperatures, better farming conditions, plentiful timber, and bison herds, which incentivized relocation to the area near the Rio Grande.[62] In addition to numerous settlements along the Rio Grande, contemporary descendants of the Mesa Verdeans live in pueblos at Acomo, Zuni, Jemez, and Laguna.[57][f]
Organization[edit]
Although Chaco Canyon might have exerted regional control over Mesa Verde during the late 11th and early 12th centuries, most archeologists view the Mesa Verde region as a collection of smaller communities based on central sites and related outliers that were never fully integrated into a larger civic structure.[64] Several ancient roads, averaging 15 to 45 feet (4.6 to 13.7m) wide and lined with earthen berms, have been identified in the region. Most appear to connect communities and shrines; others encircle great house sites. The extent of the network is unclear, but no roads have been discovered leading to the Chacoan Great North Road, or directly connecting Mesa Verde and Chacoan sites.[65]
Ancestral Puebloan shrines, called herraduras, have been identified near road segments in the region. Their purpose is unclear, but several C-shaped herraduras have been excavated, and they are thought to have been "directional shrines" used to indicate the location of great houses.[66][g]
Architecture[edit]
Section view of Kiva A in Mesa Verde's Fire Temple, cut from laser scan data collected by a CyArk/National Park Service partnership. Since Fire Temple was at least partially built to conform to the dimensions of the cliff alcove in which it was built, it is neither round in form nor truly subterranean like other structures generally defined as kivas.
Mesa Verde is best known for a large number of well-preserved cliff dwellings, houses built in alcoves, or rock overhangs along the canyon walls. The structures contained within these alcoves were mostly blocks of hard sandstone, held together and plastered with adobe mortar. Specific constructions had many similarities but were generally unique in form due to the individual topography of different alcoves along the canyon walls. In marked contrast to earlier constructions and villages on top of the mesas, the cliff dwellings of Mesa Verde reflected a region-wide trend towards the aggregation of growing regional populations into close, highly defensible quarters during the 13th century.[67]
Pueblo buildings were built with stone, windows facing south, and in U, E and L shapes. The buildings were located more closely together and reflected deepening religious celebration. Towers were built near kivas and likely used for lookouts. Pottery became more versatile, including pitchers, ladles, bowls, jars and dishware for food and drink. White pottery with black designs emerged, the pigments coming from plants. Water management and conservation techniques, including the use of reservoirs and silt-retaining dams, also emerged during this period.[68] Styles for these sandstone/mortar constructions, both surface and cliff dwellings, included T-shaped windows and doors. This has been taken by some archaeologists, including Stephen H. Lekson, as evidence of the continuing reach of the Chacoan system.[69] Other researchers see these elements as part of a more generalized Puebloan style and/or spiritual significance, rather than evidence of a continuing specific elite socioeconomic system.[70]
While much of the construction in these sites is consistent with common Pueblo architectural forms, including kivas, towers, and pit-houses, the space constrictions of these alcoves necessitated what seems to have been a far denser concentration of their populations. Mug House, a typical cliff dwelling of the period, was home to around 100 people who shared 94 small rooms and eight kivas built against each other and sharing many of their walls; builders in these areas maximized space in any way they could, with no areas considered off-limits to construction.[38]
Astronomy[edit]
The Sun Temple at Mesa Verde
Mesa Verdeans used astronomical observations to plan their farming and religious ceremonies, drawing on both natural features in the landscape and masonry structures built for this purpose. Several great houses in the region were aligned to the cardinal directions, which positioned windows, doors, and walls along the path of the sun, whose rays would indicate the passing of seasons. Mesa Verde's Sun Temple is thought to have been an astronomical observatory.[71]
The temple is D-shaped, and its alignment is 10.7 degrees off true east-west.[72] Its location and orientation indicate that its builders understood the cycles of both the sun and the moon.[73] It is aligned to the major lunar standstill, which occurs once every 18.6 years, and the sunset during the winter solstice, which can be viewed setting over the temple from a platform at the south end of Cliff Palace, across Fewkes Canyon. At the bottom of the canyon is the Sun Temple fire pit, which is illuminated by the first rays of the rising sun during the winter solstice. Sun Temple is one of the largest exclusively ceremonial structures ever built by the Ancestral Puebloans.[74][h]
Agriculture and water-control systems[edit]
Far View Reservoir
Starting in the 6th century, the farmers living in central Mesa Verde cultivated corn, beans, squash, and gourds. The combination of corn and beans provided the Mesa Verdeans with the amino acids of a complete protein. When conditions were good, 3 or 4 acres (1.2 or 1.6ha) of land would provide enough food for a family of three or four individuals for one year, providing they supplemented with game and wild plants. As Mesa Verdeans increasingly relied on corn as a dietary staple, the success or failure of crop yields factored heavily into their lives. The mesa tilts slightly to the south, which increased its exposure to the sun.[76] Before the introduction of pottery, foods were baked, roasted, and parched. Hot rocks dropped into containers could bring water to a brief boil, but because beans must be boiled for an hour or more their use was not widespread until after pottery had disseminated throughout the region. With the increased availability of ceramics after 600, beans became much easier to cook. This provided a high quality protein that reduced reliance on hunting. It also aided corn cultivation, as legumes add much needed nutrients to soils they are grown in, which likely increased corn yields.[77]
The most Mesa Verdeans practiced dry farming, which relied on rain to water their crops, but others utilized runoff, springs, seeps, and natural collection pools. Starting in the 9th century, they dug and maintained reservoirs that caught runoff from summer showers and spring snowmelt; some crops were watered by hand.[78] Archeologists believe that prior to the 13th century, springs and other sources of water were considered shared public resources, but as Mesa Verdeans moved into increasingly larger pueblos built near or around water supplies control was privatized and limited to members of the surrounding community.[79]
Between 750 and 800, Mesa Verdeans began constructing two large water containment structures in canyon bottoms– the Morefield and Box Elder reservoirs. Soon afterward, work began on two more: the Far View and Sagebrush reservoirs, which were approximately 90 feet (27m) across and constructed on the mesa top. The reservoirs lie on an east-west line that runs for approximately 6 miles (9.7km), which suggests builders followed a centralized plan for the system. In 2004, the American Society of Civil Engineers designated these four structures as National Civil Engineering Historic Landmarks.[80] A 2014 geospatial analyses suggested that neither collection nor retention of water was possible in the Far View Reservoir. This interpretation views the structure as a ceremonial space with procession roads in an adaptation of Chacoan culture.[81]
Hunting and foraging[edit]
Ancestral Puebloan bone awls
Mesa Verdeans typically harvested local small game, but sometimes organized hunting parties that traveled long distances. Their main sources of animal protein came from mule deer and rabbits, but they occasionally hunted Bighorn sheep, antelope, and elk.[82] They began to domesticate turkeys starting around 1000, and by the 13th century consumption of the animal peaked, supplanting deer as the primary protein source at many sites. These domesticated turkeys consumed large amounts of corn, which further deepened reliance on the staple crop.[83] Puebloans wove blankets from turkey feathers and rabbit fur, and made implements such as awls and needles from turkey and deer bones. Despite the availability of fish in the area's rivers and streams, archeological evidence suggests that they were rarely eaten.[82]
Mesa Verdeans supplemented their diet by gathering the seeds and fruits of wild plants, searching large expanses of land while procuring these resources. Depending on the season, they collected piñon nuts and juniper berries, weedy goosefoot, pigweed, purslane, tomatillo, tansy mustard, globe mallow, sunflower seeds, and yucca, as well as various species of grass and cacti. Prickly pear fruits provided a rare source of natural sugar. Wild seeds were cooked and ground up into porridge. They used sagebrush and mountain mahogany, along with piñon and juniper, for firewood. They also smoked wild tobacco.[84] Because the Ancestral Puebloans considered all material consumed and discarded by their communities as sacred, their midden piles were viewed with reverence. Starting during the Basketmaker III period, c. 700, Mesa Verdeans often buried their dead in these mounds.[71]
Pottery[edit]
Mesa Verde black-on-white
Mesa Verde corrugated jars
Scholars are divided as to whether pottery was invented in the Four Corners region or introduced from the south. Specimens of shallow, unfired clay bowls found at Canyon de Chelly indicate the innovation might have been derived from using clay bowls to parch seeds. Repeated uses rendered these bowls hard and impervious to water, which might represent the first fired pottery in the region. An alternate theory suggests that pottery originated in the Mogollon Rim area to the south, where brown-paste bowls were used during the first few centuries of the common era.[85] Others believe pottery was introduced to Mesa Verde from Mexico, c. 300 CE.[86] There is no evidence of ancient pottery markets in the region, but archeologists believe that local potters exchanged decorative wares between families. Cooking pots made with crushed igneous rock tempers from places like Ute Mountain were more resilient and desirable, and Puebloans from throughout the region traded for them.[87]
Neutron activation analysis indicates that much of the black-on-white pottery found at Mesa Verde was produced locally. Cretaceous clays from both the Dakota and Menefee Formations were used in black-on-white wares, and Mancos Formation clays for corrugated jars.[88][i] Evidence that pottery of both types moved between several locations around the region suggests interaction between groups of ancient potters, or they might have shared a common source of raw materials.[88] The Mesa Verde black-on-white pottery was produced at three locations: Sand Canyon, Castle Rock, and Mesa Verde.[89] Archeological evidence indicates that nearly every household had at least one member who worked as a potter. Trench kilns were constructed away from pueblos and closer to sources of firewood. Their sizes vary, but the larger ones were up to 24 feet (7.3m) long and thought to have been shared kilns that served several families. Designs were added to ceramic vessels with a Yucca-leaf brush and paints made from iron, manganese, beeplant, and tansy mustard.[90]
Most of the pottery found in 9th century pueblos was sized for individuals or small families, but as communal ceremonialism expanded during the 13th century, many larger, feast–sized vessels were produced.[91] Corrugated decorations appear on Mesa Verde grey wares after 700, and by 1000 entire vessels were crafted in this way. The technique created a rough exterior surface that was easier to hold on to than regular grey wares, which were smooth.[92] By the 11th century these corrugated vessels, which dissipated heat more efficiently than smoother ones, had largely replaced the older style, whose tendency to retain heat made them prone to boiling over.[93] Corrugation likely developed as ancient potters attempted to mimic the visual properties of coiled basketry.[94] Corrugated wares were made using clay from formations other than Menefee, which suggests that ancient potters selected different clays for different styles.[89] Potters also selected clays and altered firing conditions to achieve specific colors. Under normal conditions, pots made of Mancos shale turned grey when fired, and those made of Morrison Formation clay turned white. Clays from southeastern Utah turned red when fired in a high-oxygen environment.[93]
Rock art and murals[edit]
Mesa Verde's Petroglyph Point; the glyphs represent (top; from right to left) the Eagle, Mountain Sheep, Parrot, Horned Toad, and Mountain Lion clans, and the Ancestral Puebloans (bottom).[95]
Rock art is found throughout the Mesa Verde region, but its dispersion is uneven and periodic. Some locations have numerous examples; others have none, and some periods saw prolific creation, while others saw little. Styles also vary over time. Examples are relatively rare on Mesa Verde proper, but abundant in the middle San Juan River area, which might indicate the river's importance as a travel route and key source of water. Common motifs in the rock art of the region include, anthropomorphic figures in procession and during copulation or childbirth, handprints, animal and people tracks, wavy lines, spirals, concentric circles, animals, and hunting scenes.[96] As the region's population plummeted during the late 13th century, the subject of Mesa Verdean rock art increasingly shifted to depictions of shields, warriors, and battle scenes.[97] Modern Hopi have interpreted the petroglyphs at Mesa Verde's Petroglyph Point as depictions of various clans of people.[95]
Starting during the late Pueblo II period (1020) and continuing through Pueblo III (1300), the Ancestral Puebloans of the Mesa Verde region created plaster murals in their great houses, particularly in their kivas. The murals contained both painted and inscribed images depicting animals, people, and designs used in textiles and pottery dating back as far as Basketmaker III, c. 500. Others depict triangles and mounds thought to represent mountains and hills in the surrounding landscape. The murals were typically located on the face of the kiva bench and usually encircled the room. Geometric patterns that resemble symbols used in pottery and zigzag that represent stitches used in basket making are common motifs. The painted murals include the colors red, green, yellow, white, brown, and blue. The designs were still in use by the Hopi during the 15th and 16th centuries.[98]
Anthropogenic ecology, geography, and climate[edit]
Anthropogenic ecology refers to the human impact on animals and plants in an ecosystem.[82] A shift from medium and large game animals, such as deer, bighorn sheep, and antelope, to smaller ones like rabbits and turkey during the mid-10th to mid-13th centuries might indicate that Mesa Verdean subsistence hunting had dramatically altered faunal populations on the mesa.[99] Analysis of pack rat midden indicates that, with the exception of invasive species such as tumbleweed and clover, the flora and fauna in the area have remained relatively consistent for the past 4,000 years.[100]
Mesa Verde's canyons were created by streams that eroded the hard sandstone that covers the area. This resulted in Mesa Verde National Park elevations ranging from about 6,000 to 8,572 feet (1,829 to 2,613m), the highest elevation at Park Point. The terrain in the park is now a transition zone between the low desert plateaus and the Rocky Mountains.[68]
The region's precipitation pattern is bimodal, meaning agriculture is sustained through snowfall during winter and autumn and rainfall during spring and summer.[41] The climate is semi-arid. Water for farming and consumption was provided by summer rains, winter snowfall, and seeps and springs in and near the Mesa Verde villages. At 7,000 feet (2,100m), the middle mesa areas were typically ten degrees cooler than the mesa top, which reduced the amount of water needed for farming.[101] The cliff dwellings were built to take advantage of solar energy. The angle of the sun in winter warmed the masonry of the cliff dwellings, warm breezes blew from the valley, and the air was ten to twenty degrees warmer in the canyon alcoves than on the top of the mesa. In the summer, with the sun high overhead, much of the village was protected from direct sunlight in the high cliff dwellings.[102]
Geology[edit]
Although the area's first Spanish explorers named the feature Mesa Verde, the term is a misnomer, as true mesas are almost perfectly flat. Because Mesa Verde is slanted to the south, the proper geological term is cuesta, not mesa. The park is made up of several smaller cuestas located between canyons. Mesa Verde's slant contributed to the formation of the alcoves that have preserved the area's cliff dwellings.[103]
In the late Cretaceous Period, the Mancos Shale was deposited on top of the Dakota Sandstone, which is the rock formation that can be found under much of Colorado. The beds of the Mancos Shale are "fine-grained sand-stones, mudstones, and shales" which accumulated in the deep water of the Cretaceous Sea. It has a high clay content which causes it to expand when wet leading to sliding of the terrain. On top of this shale, there are three formations in the Mesaverde group which reflect the changes in depositional environment in the area over time. The first is the Point Lookout Sandstone, which is named for the Point Lookout feature in the park (elevation 8427 feet). This sandstone, which formed in the marine environment of shallow water when the Cretaceous sea was receding, is "massive, fine-grained, cross-bedded, and very resistant", in its layers reflecting waves and currents that were present during the time of its formation. Its sediments are approximately 400 feet thick, and its upper layers feature fossiliferous invertebrates.[104]
Next is the Menefee Formation, the middle formation whose content features interbedded carbonaceous shales, siltstones, and sandstones. These were deposited in semi-marine environments of brackish water, such as swamps and lagoons. Due to its depositional environment and the organic material in its composition, there are thin coal seams running through the Menefee Formation. At the top, this formation is intruded upon by the Cliff House Sandstone.[104]
The Cliff House Sandstone is the area's youngest rock layer. It was formed after the Cretaceous sea had completely receded and as a result has a high sand content from beaches, dunes, etc. and from this receives its characteristic yellow tint to its canyon faces. Like the Point Lookout Sandstone, it is about 400 feet thick. It contains numerous fossil beds of different types of shells, fish teeth, and other invertebrate leftovers from the receded sea. The shale zones in this feature determine where alcoves formed where the Ancestral Puebloans constructed their dwellings.[104]
Continuing through the Cretaceous period and into the early Tertiary, there was uplifting in the area of the Colorado Plateau, the San Juan Mountains, and the La Plata Mountains, which led to the formation of the Mesa Verde pediment with the help of erosion. Small channels of water ran across this formation depositing gravel. Later in the tertiary, the last period of uplift and rock tilting towards the south caused these streams to cut rapidly into the rock removing loose sediment and forming the vast canyons seen today. This caused the isolation of the Mesa Verde pediment from surrounding rock. Today, since the climate is more arid, these erosional processes are slowed.[104]
Rediscovery[edit]
Spruce Tree House
Mexican-Spanish missionaries and explorers Francisco Atanasio Domínguez and Silvestre Vélez de Escalante, seeking a route from Santa Fe to California, faithfully recorded their travels in 1776. They reached Mesa Verde (green plateau) region, which they named after its high, tree-covered plateaus, but they never got close enough, or into the needed angle, to see the ancient stone villages.[105][106] They were the first white men to travel the route through much of the Colorado Plateau into Utah and back through Arizona to New Mexico.[107]
The Mesa Verde region has long been occupied by the Utes, and an 1868 treaty between them and the United States government recognized Ute ownership of all Colorado land west of the Continental Divide. After there had become an interest in land in western Colorado, a new treaty in 1873 left the Ute with a strip of land in southwestern Colorado between the border with New Mexico and 15 miles north. Most of Mesa Verde lies within this strip of land. The Ute wintered in the warm, deep canyons and found sanctuary there and the high plateaus of Mesa Verde. Believing the cliff dwellings to be sacred ancestral sites, they did not live in the ancient dwellings.[105]
Occasional trappers and prospectors visited, with one prospector, John Moss, making his observations known in 1873.[108] The following year, Moss led eminent photographer William Henry Jackson through Mancos Canyon, at the base of Mesa Verde. There, Jackson both photographed and publicized a typical stone cliff dwelling.[108] Geologist William H. Holmes retraced Jackson's route in 1875.[108] Reports by both Jackson and Holmes were included in the 1876 report of the Hayden Survey, one of the four federally financed efforts to explore the American West. These and other publications led to proposals to systematically study Southwestern archeological sites.[108]
In her quest to find Ancestral Puebloan settlements, Virginia McClurg, a journalist for the New York Daily Graphic, visited Mesa Verde in 1882 and 1885. Her party rediscovered Echo Cliff House, Three Tier House, and Balcony House in 1885; these discoveries inspired her to protect the dwellings and artifacts.[68][109]
The Wetherills[edit]
A family of cattle ranchers, the Wetherills, befriended members of the Ute tribe near their ranch southwest of Mancos, Colorado. With the Ute tribe's approval, the Wetherills were allowed to bring cattle into the lower, warmer plateaus of the present Ute reservation during winter. Word of the Ancestral Puebloan great houses had spread, and Acowitz, a member of the Ute tribe, told the Wetherills of a special cliff dwelling in Mesa Verde: "Deep in that canyon and near its head are many houses of the old people– the Ancient Ones. One of those houses, high, high in the rocks, is bigger than all the others. Utes never go there, it is a sacred place."[110][111] On December 18, 1888, Richard Wetherill and cowboy Charlie Mason rediscovered Cliff Palace after spotting the ruins from the top of Mesa Verde. Wetherill gave the ruin its present-day name. Richard Wetherill, family and friends explored the ruins and gathered artifacts, some of which they sold to the Historical Society of Colorado and much of which they kept.[112][111] Among the people who stayed with the Wetherills and explored the cliff dwellings was mountaineer, photographer, and author Frederick H. Chapin, who visited the region during 1889 and 1890. He described the landscape and ruins in an 1890 article and later in an 1892 book, The Land of the Cliff-Dwellers, which he illustrated with hand-drawn maps and personal photographs.[109]
Gustaf Nordenskiöld[edit]
Cliff Palace in 1891, by Gustaf Nordenskiöld
The Wetherills also hosted Gustaf Nordenskiöld, the son of polar explorer Adolf Erik Nordenskiöld, in 1891.[113][114] Nordenskiöld was a trained mineralogist who introduced scientific methods to artifact collection, recorded locations, photographed extensively, diagrammed sites, and correlated what he observed with existing archeological literature as well as the home-grown expertise of the Wetherills.[115] He removed a lot of artifacts and sent them to Sweden, where they eventually went to the National Museum of Finland. Nordenskiöld published, in 1893, The Cliff Dwellers of the Mesa Verde.[116] When Nordenskiöld shipped the collection that he made of Mesa Verde artifacts, the event initiated concerns about the need to protect Mesa Verde land and its resources.[117]
National Park[edit]
Park map
In 1889, Goodman Point Pueblo became the first pre-Columbian archeological site in the Mesa Verde region to gain federal protection. It was the first such site to be protected in the US.[34] Virginia McClurg was diligent in her efforts between 1887 and 1906 to inform the United States and European community of the importance of protecting the important historical material and dwellings in Mesa Verde. Her efforts included enlisting support from 250,000 women through the Federation of Women's Clubs, writing and having published poems in popular magazines, giving speeches domestically and internationally, and forming the Colorado Cliff Dwellers Association. The Colorado Cliff Dwellers' purpose was to protect the resources of Colorado cliff dwellings, reclaiming as much of the original artifacts as possible and sharing information about the people who dwelt there. A fellow activist for protection of Mesa Verde and prehistoric archeological sites included Lucy Peabody, who, located in Washington, D.C., met with members of Congress to further the cause.[115][118][109] Former Mesa Verde National Park superintendent Robert Heyder communicated his belief that the park might have been far more significant with the hundreds of artifacts taken by Nordenskiöld.[119]
Jesse Walter Fewkes at Mesa Verde cliff dwellings, c. 1910
By the end of the 19th century, it was clear that Mesa Verde needed protection from people in general who came to Mesa Verde and created or sold their own collection of artifacts. In a report to the Secretary of the Interior, Smithsonian Institution Ethnologist Jesse Walter Fewkes described vandalism at Mesa Verde's Cliff Palace:
Parties of "curio seekers" camped on the ruin for several winters, and it is reported that many hundred specimens there have been carried down the mesa and sold to private individuals. Some of these objects are now in museums, but many are forever lost to science. In order to secure this valuable archeological material, walls were broken down... often simply to let light into the darker rooms; floors were invariably opened and buried kivas mutilated. To facilitate this work and get rid of the dust, great openings were broken through the five walls which form the front of the ruin. Beams were used for firewood to so great an extent that not a single roof now remains. This work of destruction, added to that resulting from erosion due to rain, left Cliff Palace in a sad condition.[120]
Many artifacts from Mesa Verde are now located in museums and private collections in the USA and across the world. A representative selection of pottery vessels and other objects, for example, is now in the British Museum in London.[121] In 1906, President Theodore Roosevelt approved creation of the Mesa Verde National Park and the Federal Antiquities Act of 1906.[122] The park was an effort to "preserve the works of man" and was the first of its kind. The park was named with the Spanish term for green table because of its forests of juniper and piñon trees.[123]
Excavation and protection[edit]
From 1908 to 1922, Spruce Tree House, Cliff Palace, and Sun Temple ruins were stabilized.[124] Most of the early efforts were led by Jesse Walter Fewkes.[125] During the 1930s and 40s, Civilian Conservation Corps workers, starting in 1932, played key roles in excavation efforts, building trails and roads, creating museum exhibits and constructing buildings at Mesa Verde.[125] From 1958 to 1965, Wetherill Mesa Archeological Project included archeological excavations, stabilization of sites, and surveys. With excavation and study of eleven Wetherill Mesa sites, it is considered the largest archeological effort in the US.[125] The project oversaw the excavation of Long House and Mug House.[126]
In 1966, as with all historical areas administered by the National Park Service, Mesa Verde was listed on the National Register of Historic Places, and in 1987, the Mesa Verde Administrative District was listed on the register.[127] It was designated a World Heritage Site in 1978.[125] In its 2015 travel awards, Sunset magazine named Mesa Verde National Park "the best cultural attraction" in the Western United States.[128]
Services[edit]
Park Ranger giving a tour at Mesa Verde National Park
The entrance to Mesa Verde National Park is on U.S. Route 160, approximately 9 miles (14km) east of the community of Cortez and 7 miles (11km) west of Mancos, Colorado.[129] The park covers 52,485 acres (21,240ha)[130] It contains 4,372 documented sites, including more than 600 cliff dwellings.[131] It is the largest archeological preserve in the US.[132] It protects some of the most important and best preserved archeological sites in the country.[123] The park initiated the Archeological Site Conservation Program in 1995. It analyses data pertaining to how sites are constructed and utilized.[126]
The Mesa Verde Visitor and Research Center is located just off of Highway 160 and is before the park entrance booths. The Visitor and Research Center opened in December 2012. Chapin Mesa (the most popular area) is 20 miles (32km) beyond the visitor center.[129] Mesa Verde National Park is an area of federal exclusive jurisdiction. Because of this all law enforcement, emergency medical service, and wildland/structural fire duties are conducted by federal National Park Service Law Enforcement Rangers. The Mesa Verde National Park Post Office has the ZIP code 81330.[133] Access to park facilities vary by season. Three of the cliff dwellings on Chapin Mesa are open to the public. The Chapin Mesa Archeological Museum is open all year. Spruce Tree House is also open all year, weather permitting. Balcony House, Long House and Cliff Palace require tour tickets for ranger-guided tours. Many other dwellings are visible from the road but not open to tourists. The park offers hiking trails, a campground, and, during peak season, facilities for food, fuel, and lodging; these are unavailable in the winter.[129]
Wildfires and culturally modified trees[edit]
Wildfire damage on Chapin Mesa
During the years 1996 to 2003, the park suffered from several wildfires.[134] The fires, many of which were started by lightning during times of drought, burned 28,340 acres (11,470ha) of forest, more than half the park. The fires also damaged many archeological sites and park buildings. They were named: Chapin V (1996), Bircher and Pony (2000), Long Mesa (2002), and the Balcony House Complex fires (2003), which were five fires that began on the same day. The Chapin V and Pony fires destroyed two rock art sites, and the Long Mesa fire nearly destroyed the museum– the first one ever built in the National Park System– and Spruce Tree House, the third largest cliff dwelling in the park.[135]
Prior to the fires of 1996 to 2003, archeologists had surveyed approximately ninety percent of the park. Dense undergrowth and tree cover kept many ancient sites hidden from view, but after the Chapin V, Bircher and Pony fires, 593 previously undiscovered sites were revealed– most of them date to the Basketmaker III and Pueblo I periods. Also uncovered during the fires were extensive water containment features, including 1,189 check dams, 344 terraces, and five reservoirs that date to the Pueblo II and III periods.[136] In February 2008, the Colorado Historical Society decided to invest a part of its $7million budget into a culturally modified trees project in the National Park.[137]
Ute Mountain Tribal Park[edit]
Main article: Ute Mountain Tribal Park
The Ute Mountain Tribal Park, adjoining Mesa Verde National Park to the east of the mountains, is approximately 125,000 acres (51,000ha) along the Mancos River. Hundreds of surface sites, cliff dwellings, petroglyphs, and wall paintings of Ancestral Puebloan and Ute cultures are preserved in the park. Native American Ute tour guides provide background information about the people, culture, and history of the park lands. National Geographic Traveler chose it as one of "80 World Destinations for Travel in the 21st Century", one of only nine places selected in the US.[138]
Key sites[edit]
In addition to the cliff dwellings, Mesa Verde boasts a number of mesa-top ruins.[139] Examples open to public access include the Far View Complex and Cedar Tree Tower on Chapin Mesa, and Badger House Community, on Wetherill Mesa.[140]
Balcony House[edit]
Emmett Harryson, a Navajo, at a T-shaped doorway at Balcony House (1929)
Balcony House is set on a high ledge facing east. Its 45 rooms and 2 kivas would have been cold during the winter. Visitors on ranger-guided tours enter by climbing a 32-foot ladder and a crawling through a 12-foot tunnel. The exit, a series of toe-holds in a cleft of the cliff, was believed to be the only entry and exit route for the cliff dwellers, which made the small village easy to defend and secure. One log was dated at 1278, so it was likely built not long before the Mesa Verde people migrated out of the area.[141][142] It was officially excavated in 1910 by Jesse Nusbaum, one of the first Superintendents of Mesa Verde National Park.[143] Visitors can enter Balcony House through ranger-guided tours.[144]
Cliff Palace[edit]
Main article: Cliff Palace
This multi-storied ruin, the best-known cliff dwelling in Mesa Verde, is located in the largest alcove in the center of the Great Mesa. It was south- and southwest-facing, providing greater warmth from the sun in the winter. Dating back more than 700 years, the dwelling is constructed of sandstone, wooden beams, and mortar.[145] Many of the rooms were brightly painted.[146][147] Cliff Palace was home to approximately 125 people, but was likely an important part of a larger community of sixty nearby pueblos, which housed a combined six hundred or more people. With 23 kivas and 150 rooms, Cliff Palace is the largest cliff dwelling in Mesa Verde National Park.[30]
Long House[edit]
Located on the Wetherill Mesa, Long House is the second-largest Mesa Verdean village; approximately 150 people lived there. The location was excavated from 1959 through 1961, as part of the Wetherhill Mesa Archeological Project.[148] Long House was built c. 1200; it was occupied until 1280. The cliff dwelling features 150 rooms, a kiva, a tower, and a central plaza.[149] Its rooms are not clustered like typical cliff dwellings. Stones were used without shaping for fit and stability. Two overhead ledges contain storage space for grain. One ledge seems to include an overlook with small holes in the wall to see the rest of the village below. A spring is accessible within several hundred feet, and seeps are located in the rear of the village.[150]
Mug, Oak Tree, Spruce Tree, and Square Tower houses[edit]
Mug House is located on Wetherill Mesa; it contains 94 rooms, a large kiva, and a nearby reservoir. It received its name from four mugs the Charles Mason and the Wetherill brothers found strung together at the site.[151] Oak Tree House and neighboring Fire Temple can be visited via a 2-hour ranger-guided hike.[152] Spruce Tree House is the third-largest village, within several hundred feet of a spring, and had 130 rooms and eight kivas. It was constructed sometime between 1211 and 1278. It is believed anywhere from 60 to 80 people lived there at one time.[153] Because of its protective location, it is well preserved.[154][153] The short trail to Spruce Tree House begins at the Chapin Mesa Archeological Museum.[155] The Square Tower House is one of the stops on the Mesa Top Loop Road driving tour.[155] The tower is the tallest structure in Mesa Verde.[156]
References[edit]
Notes
^ Corn was introduced to the Great Sage Plain, the regions north and west of Mesa Verde, from Mexico.[8]
^ Donna Glowacki refutes this position, suggesting that the people of Aztec never achieved the wide-spread influence of Chaco Canyon. She believes the relationship between Mesa Verde and Aztec was more likely one of competition and conflict, versus religious or social hegemony.[28]
^ The earliest known evidence for large-scale violence in the region was uncovered in southeastern Utah. Future Mesa Verde rediscoverer, Richard Wetherill, then leading the Hyde Exploring Expedition, located the site, now called "Cave 7", in which the bodies of nearly 100 men, women, and children were found. They date to the late Basketmaker II period (200 BCE to 500 CE). Evidence of defensive structures, such as palisades and stockades, dating to the 7th and 11th centuries have been uncovered near ancient Mesa Verdean farmsteads.[48]
^ When the Spanish first settled in the area in 1598, they proposed that the Utes and Navajo had driven the Ancestral Puebloans away from Mesa Verde.[56] In 1891, Gustaf Nordenskiöld proposed that the Mesa Verdeans had been driven away from the area by hostile intruders. In the early 20th century, Jesse Walter Fewkes theorized that climate change had adversely affected water supplies in the region, which led to widespread crop failure and the rapid depopulation of the area. The last two theories remain at the foreground of the archeological investigation of Mesa Verde.[57]
^ Contemporary Native Americans do not describe the region as abandoned, but rather view it as a stage in the area's ongoing indigenous culture.[57]
^ During this time, the entirety of the Zuni people are believed to have migrated to western New Mexico. Archeological evidence suggests that another large group of Mesa Verdeans migrated approximately 200 miles (320km) to southwestern New Mexico, where they built structures that are now known as Pinnacle Ruin.[63]
^ Similar structures are used by modern Pueblo people.[66]
^ Painted wavy lines in the square tower at Cliff Palace average 18.6 marks each, suggesting that people recorded four of these events there.[75] Jesse Walter Fewkes named the building Sun Temple after finding rock art in the southwest corner of the site depicting the sun.[72]
^ Mancos shale was the most commonly used clay in the region, particularly for non-decorated grey wares.[86]
Citations
^ "NPS Annual Recreation Visits Report". National Park Service. Retrieved March 7, 2012.
^ Charles 2006, pp.9–10: Paleo-Indians; Lekson 2015, p.105: southeastern Utah to northwestern New Mexico.
^ Charles 2006, pp.9–10.
^ Charles 2006, p.10.
^ a b Charles 2006, pp.10–11.
^ Charles 2006, pp.11–12.
^ Charles 2006, pp.12–13.
^ Naranjo 2006, p.54.
^ Charles 2006, pp.14–15.
^ Charles 2006, pp.14–15: end of Basketmaker II; Wilshusen 2006, p.19 beginning of Basketmaker III.
^ Ortman 2006, p.102.
^ a b Wilshusen 2006, pp.19–21.
^ Cordell et al. 2007, p.383.
^ Cordell et al. 2007, pp.383–85.
^ Wilshusen 2006, p.23.
^ Wilshusen 2006, pp.23–24.
^ a b Lipe 2006, pp.30–31.
^ Wilshusen 2006, p.19.
^ Wilshusen 2006, pp.19, 24–25.
^ Wilshusen 2006, p.26.
^ a b Wilshusen 2006, pp.26–27.
^ a b c d e Lipe 2006, p.29.
^ a b Adams 2006, pp.3–4.
^ Lipe 2006, p.34.
^ Lipe 2006, pp.32–33.
^ Lekson, Stephen. The Chaco Meridian: One Thousand Years of Political and Religious Power in the Ancient Southwest. Rowman &amp; Littlefield, 2015
^ Varien 2006, p.42.
^ a b c d e Varien 2006, p.44.
^ Lipe 2006, p.30.
^ a b Varien 2006, p.41.
^ Cordell et al. 2007, pp.385–86, 398–99.
^ Lipe 2006, p.36.
^ a b Varien 2006, pp.40–41.
^ a b Varien 2006, p.39.
^ Varien 2006, pp.42–44.
^ Cordell et al. 2007, p.385.
^ Lekson 2015, p.105.
^ a b Kantner 2004, pp.161–66.
^ Varien 2006, pp.40, 46.
^ Glowacki, Neff &amp; Glascock 1998, p.218.
^ a b c Cameron 2006, p.140.
^ Varien 2006, p.46.
^ Kuckelman 2006, p.128.
^ Kuckelman 2006, p.131.
^ Cameron 2006, pp.140–41.
^ Cordell et al. 2007, pp.386, 398.
^ Lipe 2006, p.37.
^ a b Kuckelman 2006, p.127.
^ Kuckelman 2006, pp.132–33.
^ Kuckelman 2006, p.134.
^ Kohler 2006, p.73.
^ Casey 1993, p.220.
^ Watson 1961, p.156.
^ Varien 2006, p.45.
^ Kuckelman 2006, p.135.
^ Cameron 2006, p.141.
^ a b c Cameron 2006, p.139.
^ Cameron 2006, pp.139-41.
^ Wenger 1991, p.74.
^ Cordell et al. 2007, pp.395–98.
^ Cameron 2006, p.144.
^ Cameron 2006, pp.144–45.
^ Cameron 2006, p.142.
^ Hurst &amp; Till 2006, p.77.
^ Hurst &amp; Till 2006, p.79.
^ a b Hurst &amp; Till 2006, p.80.
^ Wenger 1991, pp.13, 47–59.
^ a b c Wenger 1991, pp.9–13, 24.
^ Lekson 2015, pp.158, 175–80.
^ Phillips, David A., Jr., 2000, "The Chaco Meridian: A skeptical analysis" paper presented to the 65th annual meeting of the Society of American Archaeology, Philadelphia.
^ a b Hurst &amp; Till 2006, p.83.
^ a b Malville 2006, p.90.
^ Malville 2006, p.89.
^ Malville 2006, pp.85, 90–91.
^ Malville 2006, p.91.
^ Adams 2006, pp.1–4.
^ Ortman 2006, pp.102–03.
^ Lipe 2006, pp.33–34.
^ Hurst &amp; Till 2006, p.78.
^ Wright 2006, pp.123–24.
^ Benson et al. 2014, pp.164–79.
^ a b c Adams 2006, p.6.
^ Kohler 2006, p.72.
^ Adams 2006, pp.4–6.
^ Ortman 2006, p.101.
^ a b Lang 2006, p.61.
^ Ortman 2006, pp.104–06.
^ a b Glowacki, Neff &amp; Glascock 1998, pp.231, 234, 237.
^ a b Glowacki, Neff &amp; Glascock 1998, p.238.
^ Ortman 2006, pp.103–05.
^ Ortman 2006, pp.106.
^ Lang 2006, p.62.
^ a b Ortman 2006, p.103.
^ Ortman 2006, pp.106–07.
^ a b National Park Service 1986, pp.10–11.
^ Hurst &amp; Till 2006, p.81.
^ Kuckelman 2006, p.132.
^ Cole 2006, pp.93–98.
^ Cordell et al. 2007, p.386.
^ Adams 2006, pp.1–3.
^ Wenger 1991, p.15.
^ Wenger 1991, pp.16–17.
^ National Park Service (h).
^ a b c d Harris, Tuttle &amp; Tuttle 2004, pp.91–102.
^ a b Wenger 1991, p.77.
^ Watson 1961, pp.9–10.
^ Treimer, Katieri (1989), "Site Research Report, Site Number 916, Southwest Colorado", Earth Metrics and SRI International, for Contel Systems and the United States Air Force
^ a b c d Reynolds &amp; Reynolds 2006.
^ a b c Robertson 2003, pp.61–72.
^ Wenger 1991, p.79.
^ a b Watson 1961, pp.133–37.
^ Wenger 1991, pp.79–80.
^ Wenger 1991, p.81.
^ Watson 1961, p.27.
^ a b Fitzgerald 2009, p.W12.
^ Wenger 1991, pp.82–84.
^ Wenger 1991, pp.83–84.
^ Wenger 1991, p.85.
^ Webb, Boyer &amp; Turner 2010, p.302.
^ United States Department of the Interior, pp. 486-487, 503.
^ "British Museum - Collection Mesa Verde". British Museum.
^ Wenger 1991, pp.84–85.
^ a b National Park Service (a).
^ Casey 1993, p.221.
^ a b c d National Park Service (d).
^ a b Nordby 2006, p.111.
^ "Montezuma County, Colorado", National Register of Historic Places, retrieved August 7, 2015
^ Harden 2015.
^ a b c Mesa Verde Trip Planner. Mesa Verde National Park Retrieved September 22, 2011
^ "Listing of acreage as of December 31, 2011". Land Resource Division, National Park Service. Retrieved June 4, 2015.
^ Cordell et al. 2007, p.380: 4,372 documented sites; Nordby 2006, p.111: 600 cliff dwellings.
^ "Archeological adventure". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved June 16, 2015.
^ ZIP Code Lookup United States Postal Service Retrieved January 2, 2007
^ Mesa Verde Fire History. Mesa Verde National Park Retrieved September 24, 2011
^ Bell 2006, p.119.
^ Bell 2006, pp.120–21.
^ State Historical Fund awards more than $7M in grants, Denver Business Journal, Feb 14, 2008.
^ Ute Mountain Tribal Park. Ute Mountain Tribal Park Retrieved June 18, 2011
^ Casey 1993, pp.220–21.
^ Casey 1993, p.222.
^ Casey 1993, pp.225–26.
^ Wenger 1991, pp.55–56.
^ "Mesa Verde Balcony House". Aramark: Parks and Destinations. Retrieved October 23, 2011.
^ National Park Service (b).
^ Cliff House Visit Mesa Verde Retrieved October 16, 2011
^ Wenger 1991, p.51.
^ Watson 1961, pp.3, 29, 31, 37.
^ National Park Service (c).
^ Glowacki, Neff &amp; Glascock 1998, p.220.
^ Wenger 1991, p.57.
^ Wenger 1991, p.59.
^ National Park Service (g).
^ a b National Park Service (e).
^ Wenger 1991, p.52.
^ a b National Park Service (f).
^ Noel 2015, p.36.
Bibliography
Adams, Karen R. (2006), "Through the Looking Glass", in Nobel, David Grant, The Mesa Verde World: Explorations in Ancestral Puebloan Archaeology, School of American Research Press, pp.1–7, ISBN978-1-930618-75-6
Bell, Julie (2006), "Fire and Archeology on Mesa Verde", in Nobel, David Grant, The Mesa Verde World: Explorations in Ancestral Puebloan Archaeology, School of American Research Press, pp.118–21, ISBN978-1-930618-75-6
Benson, L.V.; Griffin, E.R.; Stein, J.R.; Friedman, R.A.; Andrae, S.W. (2014), "Mummy Lake: An Unroofed Ceremonial Structure Within a Large-scale Ritual Landscape", Journal of Archaeological Science 44, pp.164–79, doi:10.1016/j.jas.2014.01.021
Cameron, Catherine M. (2006), "Leaving Mesa Verde", in Nobel, David Grant, The Mesa Verde World: Explorations in Ancestral Puebloan Archaeology, School of American Research Press, pp.139–47, ISBN978-1-930618-75-6
Casey, Robert L. (1993) [1983], High Journey to the Southwest, The Globe Pequot Press, ISBN978-1-56440-151-9
Charles, Mona (2006), "The First Mesa Verdeans: Hunters, Foragers, and First Farmers", in Nobel, David Grant, The Mesa Verde World: Explorations in Ancestral Puebloan Archaeology, School of American Research Press, pp.8–17, ISBN978-1-930618-75-6
Cole, Sally J. (2006), "Imagery and Tradition: Murals of the Mesa Verde Region", in Nobel, David Grant, The Mesa Verde World: Explorations in Ancestral Puebloan Archaeology, School of American Research Press, pp.92–99, ISBN978-1-930618-75-6
Cordell, Linda S.; Van West, Carla R.; Dean, Jeffrey S.; Muenchrath, Deborah A. (2007), "Mesa Verde Settlement History and Relocation: Climate Change, Social Networks, and Ancestral Pueblo Migration", Kiva 72 (4), pp.379–405
Fitzgerald, Michael (March 14, 2009), The Majesty of Mesa Verde: In Colorado, canyons and ancient dwellings still awe, The Wall Street Journal, p.W12, retrieved June 1, 2015
Glowacki, Donna M.; Neff, Hector; Glascock, Michael D. (1998), "An Initial Assessment of the Production and Movement of Thirteenth Century Ceramic Vessels in the Mesa Verde Region", Kiva 63 (3), pp.217–41
Harden, Mark (2015), Colorado landmark named West's best cultural attraction, Denver Business Journal, retrieved June 16, 2015
Harris, Ann G.; Tuttle, Esther; Tuttle, Sherwood D. (2004), "Mesa Verde National Park", Geology of National Parks (6 ed.), Kendall Hunt Publishing, pp.91–102, ISBN978-0-7872-9971-2
Hurst, Winston; Till, Jonathan (2006), "Mesa Verdean Sacred Landscapes", in Nobel, David Grant, The Mesa Verde World: Explorations in Ancestral Puebloan Archaeology, School of American Research Press, pp.74–83, ISBN978-1-930618-75-6
Kantner, John (2004), Ancient Puebloan Southwest, Cambridge University Press, ISBN978-0-521-78880-9
Kohler, Timothy A. (2006), "Simulation and Imagination: Fistfight in the Mesa Verde", in Nobel, David Grant, The Mesa Verde World: Explorations in Ancestral Puebloan Archaeology, School of American Research Press, pp.66–73, ISBN978-1-930618-75-6
Kuckelman, Kristen A. (2006), "Ancient Violence in the Mesa Verde Region", in Nobel, David Grant, The Mesa Verde World: Explorations in Ancestral Puebloan Archaeology, School of American Research Press, pp.127–35, ISBN978-1-930618-75-6
Lang, Richard W. (2006), "Craft Arts of the Mesa Verde", in Nobel, David Grant, The Mesa Verde World: Explorations in Ancestral Puebloan Archaeology, School of American Research Press, pp.58–65, ISBN978-1-930618-75-6
Lekson, Stephen H. (2015) [1999], The Chaco Meridian: One Thousand Years of Political and Religious Power in the Ancient Southwest (Second ed.), Rowman and Littlefield, ISBN978-1-4422-4645-4
Lipe, Willian D. (2006), "The Mesa Verde Region during Chaco Times", in Nobel, David Grant, The Mesa Verde World: Explorations in Ancestral Puebloan Archaeology, School of American Research Press, pp.28–37, ISBN978-1-930618-75-6
Malville, J. McKim (2006), "The Cosmic and the Sacred at Yellow Jacket Pueblo and Mesa Verde", in Nobel, David Grant, The Mesa Verde World: Explorations in Ancestral Puebloan Archaeology, School of American Research Press, pp.84–91, ISBN978-1-930618-75-6
Naranjo, Tessie (2006), ""We Came from the South, We Came from the North": Some Tewa Origin Stories", in Nobel, David Grant, The Mesa Verde World: Explorations in Ancestral Puebloan Archaeology, School of American Research Press, pp.49–57, ISBN978-1-930618-75-6
National Park Service (1986), Petroglyph Trail Guide, Mesa Verde Museum Association and Mesa Verde National Park
Nordby, Larry V. (2006), "Understanding Mesa Verde's Cliff Dwelling Architecture", in Nobel, David Grant, The Mesa Verde World: Explorations in Ancestral Puebloan Archaeology, School of American Research Press, pp.110–17, ISBN978-1-930618-75-6
Ortman, Scott (2006), "Ancient Pottery of the Mesa Verde Country: How Ancestral Pueblo People Made It, Used It, and Thought About It", in Nobel, David Grant, The Mesa Verde World: Explorations in Ancestral Puebloan Archaeology, School of American Research Press, pp.100–109, ISBN978-1-930618-75-6
National Park Service (a), Mesa Verde, United States Department of the Interior, retrieved June 1, 2015
National Park Service (b), Mesa Verde: Balcony House, United States Department of the Interior, retrieved June 1, 2015
National Park Service (c), Mesa Verde: Long House, United States Department of the Interior, retrieved June 1, 2015
National Park Service (d), Mesa Verde: Timeline, United States Department of the Interior, retrieved June 1, 2015
National Park Service (e), Mesa Verde: Spruce Tree House, United States Department of the Interior, retrieved June 1, 2015
National Park Service (f), Mesa Verde: Self-guided tours; Chapin Mesa, United States Department of the Interior, retrieved June 1, 2015
National Park Service (g), Mesa Verde: New 2011 Backcountry Hikes, United States Department of the Interior, retrieved June 1, 2015
National Park Service (h), Mesa Verde: Geology, United States Department of the Interior, retrieved August 11, 2015
Noel, Thomas J. (2015), Colorado: A Historical Atlas, University of Oklahoma Press, ISBN978-0-8061-5353-7
Reynolds, Judith; Reynolds, David (2006), Nordenskiöld of Mesa Verde, Xlibris Corporation, ISBN978-1-4257-0484-1
Robertson, Janet (2003) [1990], The Magnificent Mountain Women: Adventures in the Colorado, University of Nebraska Press, ISBN978-0-8032-3892-3
Varien, Mark D. (2006), "Turbulent Times in the Mesa Verde World", in Nobel, David Grant, The Mesa Verde World: Explorations in Ancestral Puebloan Archaeology, School of American Research Press, pp.39–47, ISBN978-1-930618-75-6
Watson, Don (1961), Indians of the Mesa Verde, Mesa Verde Museum Association
Webb, Robert H.; Boyer, Diane E.; Turner, Raymond M. (2010), Repeat Photography: Methods and Applications in the Natural Sciences, Island Press, ISBN978-1-59726-712-0
Wenger, Gilbert R. (1991) [1980], Story of Mesa Verde National Park, Mesa Verde Museum Association, ISBN978-0-937062-15-9
Wilshusen, Richard H. (2006), "The Genesis of Pueblos: Innovations between 500 and 900 CE", in Nobel, David Grant, The Mesa Verde World: Explorations in Ancestral Puebloan Archaeology, School of American Research Press, pp.18–27, ISBN978-1-930618-75-6
Wright, Kenneth R. (2006), "Water for the Mesa Verdeans", in Nobel, David Grant, The Mesa Verde World: Explorations in Ancestral Puebloan Archaeology, School of American Research Press, pp.122–25, ISBN978-1-930618-75-6
External links[edit]
Find more about
Mesa Verde
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Commons
News stories from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Source texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Learning resources from Wikiversity
Mesa Verde National Park (National Park Service)
Interactive map of the National Park System
Mesa Verde National Park (UNESCO World Heritage Centre)
Mesa Verde Digital Media Archive (Creative Commons-licensed photos, laser scans, panoramas), data on Spruce Tree House, Fire Temple, and Square Tower House from a National Park Service/CyArk research partnership
v
t
e
National parks of the United States
Acadia
American Samoa
Arches
Badlands
Big Bend
Biscayne
Black Canyon of the Gunnison
Bryce Canyon
Canyonlands
Capitol Reef
Carlsbad Caverns
Channel Islands
Congaree
Crater Lake
Cuyahoga Valley
Death Valley
Denali
Dry Tortugas
Everglades
Gates of the Arctic
Glacier
Glacier Bay
Grand Canyon
Grand Teton
Great Basin
Great Sand Dunes
Great Smoky Mountains
Guadalupe Mountains
Haleakalā
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes
Hot Springs
Isle Royale
Joshua Tree
Katmai
Kenai Fjords
Kings Canyon
Kobuk Valley
Lake Clark
Lassen Volcanic
Mammoth Cave
Mesa Verde
Mount Rainier
North Cascades
Olympic
Petrified Forest
Pinnacles
Redwood
Rocky Mountain
Saguaro
Sequoia
Shenandoah
Theodore Roosevelt
Virgin Islands
Voyageurs
Wind Cave
Wrangell–St. Elias
Yellowstone
Yosemite
Zion
List of national parks of the United States (by elevation)
v
t
e
World Heritage Sites in the United States
Northeast
Independence Hall
Statue of Liberty
Midwest
Cahokia
South
Everglades
Great Smoky Mountains
Mammoth Cave
Monticello and the University of Virginia
Poverty Point
San Antonio Missions
West
Carlsbad Caverns
Chaco Culture National Historical Park
Grand Canyon National Park
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park
Kluane-Wrangell–St. Elias-Glacier Bay-Tatshenshini-Alsek1
Mesa Verde
Olympic National Park
Pueblo de Taos
Papahānaumokuākea
Redwood
Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park1
Yellowstone National Park
Yosemite National Park
Territories
La Fortaleza and San Juan National Historic Site
1 Shared with Canada
v
t
e
State of Colorado
Denver (capital)
Topics
Index
Coloradans
Elections
Federal lands
Geography
Government
Highways
History
Timeline
Images
Law
Military
Mountains
Museums
Public Defender
Paleontology
Rivers
Symbols
Transportation
Visitor attractions
Society
Crime
Culture
Demographics
Economy
Education
Politics
Sports
Regions
Central Colorado
Denver-Aurora-Lakewood, CO Metropolitan Statistical Area
Eastern Plains
Front Range
Grand Valley
High Plains
High Rockies
Mineral Belt
Northern Colorado
Northwestern Colorado
Piedmont
Plateau
Roan Plateau
Roaring Fork Valley
San Luis Valley
Sangre de Cristo Mountains
South-Central Colorado
Southwest Colorado
Uinta Mountains
Uintah Basin
Western Slope
Municipalities
Akron
Alamosa
Arvada
Aspen
Aurora
Boulder
Breckenridge
Brighton
Broomfield
Cañon City
Castle Rock
Centennial
Colorado Springs
Commerce City
Cortez
Craig
Delta
Denver
Durango
Englewood
Erie
Evans
Fairplay
Federal Heights
Fort Collins
Fort Morgan
Fountain
Golden
Glenwood Springs
Grand Junction
Greeley
Greenwood Village
Gunnison
La Junta
Lafayette
Lakewood
Lamar
Leadville
Littleton
Longmont
Louisville
Loveland
Montrose
Northglenn
Parker
Platteville
Pueblo
Salida
Steamboat Springs
Sterling
Superior
Thornton
Trinidad
Vail
Westminster
Wheat Ridge
Windsor
Counties
Adams
Alamosa
Arapahoe
Archuleta
Baca
Bent
Boulder
Broomfield
Chaffee
Cheyenne
Clear Creek
Conejos
Costilla
Crowley
Custer
Delta
Denver
Dolores
Douglas
Eagle
El Paso
Elbert
Fremont
Garfield
Gilpin
Grand
Gunnison
Hinsdale
Huerfano
Jackson
Jefferson
Kiowa
Kit Carson
La Plata
Lake
Larimer
Las Animas
Lincoln
Logan
Mesa
Mineral
Moffat
Montezuma
Montrose
Morgan
Otero
Ouray
Park
Phillips
Pitkin
Prowers
Pueblo
Rio Blanco
Rio Grande
Routt
Saguache
San Juan
San Miguel
Sedgwick
Summit
Teller
Washington
Weld
Yuma
v
t
e
 Indigenous peoples of Colorado
Overview
Outline of Colorado prehistory
Prehistory of Colorado
Contemporary peoples
native to Colorado
People
Arapaho
Cheyenne
Comanche
Jicarilla Apache
Kiowa
Pawnee
Shoshone
Ute
Reservations
Southern Ute Indian Reservation
Ute Mountain Ute Tribe
Major events
Battle of Beecher Island
Colorado War
Comanche Campaign
Sand Creek massacre
Prehistoric cultures
in Colorado
Paleo-Indian
Clovis culture
Cody complex
Folsom tradition
Goshen complex
Hell Gap complex
Plainview complex
Plano cultures
Archaic
Apex complex
Basketmaker culture
Mount Albion complex
Oshara Tradition
Picosa culture
Post-Archaic
Ancient Pueblo Peoples
Apishapa culture
Dismal River culture
Fremont culture
Panhandle culture
Sopris Phase
Tipi ring
Noted archaeologists
Cynthia Irwin-Williams
Paul Sidney Martin
Waldo Rudolph Wedel
Joe Ben Wheat
Related articles
List of ancient dwellings of Pueblo peoples in Colorado
List of prehistoric sites in Colorado
Trail of the Ancients
v
t
e
Protected areas of the State of Colorado
Federal
National Parks
Black Canyon of the Gunnison
Great Sand Dunes
Mesa Verde
Rocky Mountain
National Monuments
Browns Canyon (BLM-USFS)
Canyons of the Ancients (BLM)
Chimney Rock (USFS)
Colorado
Dinosaur
Florissant Fossil Beds
Hovenweep
Yucca House
National Recreation Areas
Arapaho (USFS)
Curecanti
National Historic Sites
Bent's Old Fort
Sand Creek Massacre
National Historic Trails
Old Spanish Trail
Oregon Trail
Pony Express Trail
Santa Fe Trail
National Scenic Trail
Continental Divide Trail
National Forests
Arapaho
Grand Mesa
Gunnison
Pike
Rio Grande
Roosevelt
Routt
San Isabel
San Juan
Uncompahgre
White River
National Grasslands
Comanche
Pawnee
National Wilderness
Black Canyon of the Gunnison
Black Ridge Canyons
Buffalo Peaks
Byers Peak
Cache La Poudre
Collegiate Peaks
Comanche Peak
Dominguez
Eagles Nest
Flat Tops
Fossil Ridge
Great Sand Dunes
Greenhorn Mountain
Gunnison Gorge
Holy Cross
Hunter-Fryingpan
Indian Peaks
James Peak
La Garita
Lizard Head
Lost Creek
Maroon Bells-Snowmass
Mesa Verde
Mount Evans
Mount Massive
Mount Sneffels
Mount Zirkel
Neota
Never Summer
Platte River
Powderhorn
Ptarmigan Peak
Raggeds
Rawah
Rocky Mountain National Park
Sangre de Cristo
Sarvis Creek
South San Juan
Spanish Peaks
Uncompahgre
Vasquez Peak
Weminuche
West Elk
National Conservation Areas
Dominguez-Escalante
Gunnison Gorge
McInnis Canyons
National Wildlife Refuges
Alamosa
Arapaho
Baca
Browns Park
Monte Vista
Rocky Flats
Rocky Mountain Arsenal
Two Ponds
BLM ACECs
66 Areas of Critical Environmental Concern
State
Colorado State Parks
Arkansas Headwaters
Barr Lake
Bonny Lake
Boyd Lake
Castlewood Canyon
Chatfield
Cherry Creek
Cheyenne Mountain
Crawford
Eldorado Canyon
Eleven Mile
Elkhead
Golden Gate Canyon
Harvey Gap
Highline Lake
Jackson Lake
James M. Robb - Colorado River
John Martin Reservoir
Lake Pueblo
Lathrop
Lone Mesa
Lory
Mancos
Mueller
Navajo
North Sterling
Paonia
Pearl Lake
Ridgway
Rifle Falls
Rifle Gap
Roxborough
San Luis
Spinney Mountain
St. Vrain
Stagecoach
State Forest
Staunton
Steamboat Lake
Sweitzer Lake
Sylvan Lake
Trinidad Lake
Vega
Yampa River
Colorado Natural Areas
AikenCanyon
AntHill
Antero-SaltCreek
ArikareeRiver
BadgerWash
BlacksGulch
BlueMountain
BonnyPrairie
BostonPeakFen
BoulderMountainPark
BoulderValleyHeronry
BrushCreekFen
CaliforniaPark
CastlewoodCanyon
ChalkBluffs
ColoradoTallgrassPrairie
ComancheGrassland
CopelandWillowCarr
CrossMountainCanyon
DavesDraw
DeepCreek
DeerGulch
DinosaurRidge
DomeRock
DroneyGulch
DuckCreek
DudleyBluffs
EastLostPark
EastSandDunes
ElephantRocks
ElkRiver
EscalanteCanyon
EscalanteCreek
Fairview
FourmileCreek
FruitaPaleontological
GardenParkFossil
GatewayPalisade
GenevaBasinIronFens
Gothic
GunnisonGravels
HavilandLake
HighCreekFen
HighMesaGrassland
HoosierRidge
HurricaneCanyon
IndianSpring
IndianSpringsTraceFossil
IrishCanyon
JimmyCreek
Ken-CarylRanch
KremmlingCretaceousAmmonite
LakePasture
LakeSanCristobal
LimestoneRidge
LookoutMountain
LostPark
LowerGreasewoodCreek
McElmo
MexicanCut
Mini-Wheeler
MiramonteReservoir
MishakLakes
MooseheadMountain
MountCallahan
MountCallahanSaddle
MountEmmonsIronFen
MountGoliath
Narraguinnep
NeedleRock
NorthParkPhacelia
OrientMine
OwlCanyon
ParadisePark
ParkCreekHogback
ParkMesa
PawneeWoodlands
PyramidRock
RabbitValley
RajaderoCanyon
RavenRidge
RedcloudPeak
RockyMountainWoodfrogPond
RoughCanyon
Roxborough
RunningCreek
RyanGulch
SaddleMountain
SanMiguelRiver
SandCreek
ShellDuckCreek
ShellRock
SlumgullionEarthflow
SouthBeaverCreek
SouthBoulderCreek
SouthCathedralBluffs
SpecimenMountain
Staunton
Tabeguache
TamarackRanch
TernIsland
TreasurevaultMountain
TrinidadK-TBoundary
TwoButtes
UnaweepSeep
UncompahgreFritillary
WackerRanch
WestCreek
WheelerGeologic
WhiteRocks
WilliamsCreek
Yanks Gulch/Upper Greasewood Creek Natural Area
ZapataFalls
State Wildlife Areas
307 Colorado State Wildlife Areas
Other
Trails
American Discovery Trail
Colorado Trail
Continental Divide Trail
Great Divide Trail
Kokopelli Trail
Paradox Trail
Tabeguache Trail
Colorado Department of Natural Resources (web)
v
t
e
U.S. National Register of Historic Places
Topics
Architectural style categories
Contributing property
Historic district
History of the National Register of Historic Places
Keeper of the Register
National Park Service
Property types
Lists by states
Alabama
Alaska
Arizona
Arkansas
California
Colorado
Connecticut
Delaware
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Idaho
Illinois
Indiana
Iowa
Kansas
Kentucky
Louisiana
Maine
Maryland
Massachusetts
Michigan
Minnesota
Mississippi
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New Mexico
New York
North Carolina
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
West Virginia
Wisconsin
Wyoming
Lists by insular areas
American Samoa
Guam
Minor Outlying Islands
Northern Mariana Islands
Puerto Rico
Virgin Islands
Lists by associated states
Federated States of Micronesia
Marshall Islands
Palau
Other areas
District of Columbia
Morocco
 Category
 Portal
 WikiProject
v
t
e
Cliff dwellings
United States
Ancestral Puebloan dwellings in Arizona
Ancestral Puebloan dwellings in Colorado
Ancestral Puebloan dwellings in Nevada
Ancestral Puebloan dwellings in New Mexico
Ancestral Puebloan dwellings in Texas
Ancestral Puebloan dwellings in Utah
Mexico
Ancestral Puebloan dwellings in Chihuahua
Ancestral Puebloan dwellings in Sonora
Cuarenta Casas
Huápoca
Africa
Bandiagara Escarpment
Asia
Ellora Caves
Petra
v
t
e
 Pre-Columbian North America
Periods
Lithic
Archaic
Formative
Classic
Post-Classic
Archaeological
cultures
Adena
Alachua
Ancient Pueblo (Anasazi)
Baytown
Belle Glade
Buttermilk Creek Complex
Caborn-Welborn
Calf Creek
Caloosahatchee
Clovis
Coles Creek
Deptford
Folsom
Fort Ancient
Fort Walton
Fremont
Glacial Kame
Glades
Hohokam
Hopewell
List of Hopewell sites
Leon-Jefferson
Mississippian
List of Mississippian sites
Mogollon
Monongahela
Old Cordilleran
Oneota
Paleo-Arctic
Paleo-Indians
Patayan
Plano
Plaquemine
Poverty Point
Red Ocher
Santa Rosa-Swift Creek
St. Johns
Steed-Kisker
Tchefuncte
Tocobaga
Troyville
Archaeological
sites
Angel Mounds
Bandelier National Monument
The Bluff Point Stoneworks
Cahokia
Casa Grande
Chaco Canyon
Coso Rock Art District
Crystal River Archaeological State Park
Eaker
Effigy Mounds National Monument
Etowah Indian Mounds
Eva
Folsom Site
Fort Ancient
Fort Center
Gila Cliff Dwellings National Monument
Holly Bluff Site
Hopewell Culture National Historical Park
Kincaid Mounds
Kolomoki Mounds
Marksville
Meadowcroft Rockshelter
Mesa Verde
Moorehead Circle
Moundville
Mummy Cave
Nodena Site
Ocmulgee National Monument
Old Stone Fort
Parkin Park
Pinson Mounds
Portsmouth Earthworks
Poverty Point
Pueblo Bonito
Recapture Canyon
Rock Eagle
Rock Hawk
Russell Cave National Monument
Salmon Ruins
Serpent Mound
Spiro Mounds
SunWatch
Taos Pueblo
Toltec Mounds
Town Creek Indian Mound
Winterville
Wupatki National Monument
Miscellaneous
Black drink
Buhl Woman
Ceremonial pipe
Chunkey
Clovis point
Container Revolution
Eastern Agricultural Complex
Eden point
Effigy mound
Falcon dancer
Folsom point
Green Corn Ceremony
Horned Serpent
Kennewick Man
Kiva
Medicine wheel
Metallurgy
Mi'kmaq hieroglyphic writing
Mound Builders
N.A.G.P.R.A.
Norse colonization of the Americas
Piasa
Southeastern Ceremonial Complex
Stickball
Three Sisters agriculture
Thunderbird
Underwater panther
Related
Genetic history
Portal of Indigenous peoples of North America
Pre-Columbian era
Authority control
WorldCat
VIAF: 137809249
LCCN: n00036123
ISNI: 0000 0001 2166 7355
GND: 4210599-7
SUDOC: 086200836
BNE: XX4814519
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mesa_Verde_National_Park&amp;oldid=702143585"					
				Categories: IUCN Category IIMesa Verde National ParkAncient Puebloan archaeological sites in ColoradoArchaeological museums in ColoradoArchaeological sites on the National Register of Historic Places in ColoradoCliff dwellingsDwellings of the Pueblo peoplesDenver and Rio Grande Western RailroadLandmarks in ColoradoMuseums in Montezuma County, ColoradoNational parks in ColoradoNative American archeologyNative American history of ColoradoNative American museums in ColoradoOasisamerica culturesProtected areas established in 1906Protected areas of Montezuma County, ColoradoPre-historic cities in the United StatesPuebloan buildings and structuresRuins in the United StatesWorld Heritage Sites in the United StatesAncestral Puebloans1906 establishments in ColoradoHidden categories: Good articlesUse mdy dates from June 2015Coordinates on WikidataArticles which use infobox templates with no data rowsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
			Navigation menu
						Personal tools
							Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in						
						Namespaces
															Article
															Talk
							Variants
						Views
															Read
															Edit
															View history
						More
							Search
			Navigation
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
			Interaction
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
			Tools
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
			Print/export
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
			Languages
						العربيةБългарскиCatalàDanskDeutschEspañolEsperantoفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어HrvatskiItalianoעבריתქართულიLatviešuLietuviųMagyarമലയാളംNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålپنجابیPolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийShqipSimple EnglishSuomiSvenskaTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng ViệtWinaray中文					
				Edit links			
											 This page was last modified on 28 January 2016, at 18:49.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											Cookie statement
											Mobile view

