National Park of American Samoa - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Location
American Samoa, USA
Nearestcity
Pago Pago
Coordinates
14°15′30″S 170°41′00″W﻿ / ﻿14.25833°S 170.68333°W﻿ / -14.25833; -170.68333Coordinates: 14°15′30″S 170°41′00″W﻿ / ﻿14.25833°S 170.68333°W﻿ / -14.25833; -170.68333
Area
13,500 acres (5,500ha)[1]
Established
1988-10-31
Visitors
10,440 (in2012)[2]
Governingbody
National Park Service
http://www.nps.gov/npsa/
The National Park of American Samoa is a national park in the American Territory of American Samoa, distributed across three separate islands: Tutuila, Ofu, and Ta‘ū. The park preserves and protects coral reefs, tropical rainforests, fruit bats, and the Samoan culture. It is popular for hiking and snorkeling. Of the park's 13,500 acres (5,500ha), 9,000 acres (3,600ha) is land and 4,500 acres (1,800ha) is coral reefs and ocean.[3] It is the only American national park south of the Equator.
Contents
1 Tutuila
2 Manua Island group
2.1 Ofu Unit
2.2 Ta‘ū Unit
3 Biodiversity
3.1 Fauna
3.2 Flora
3.3 Marine
4 History
5 Geologic History
6 Threats
7 See also
8 References
9 Bibliography
10 External links
Tutuila[edit]
Pola Tai (Cock's comb) off Vatia Bay, National Park of American Samoa, Tutuila.
Beach at Ofu.
The Tutuila unit of the park is on the north end of the island near Pago Pago. It is separated by Mount Alava (1,610 feet (490m)) and the Maugaloa Ridge and includes the Amalau Valley, Craggy Point, Tafeu Cove, and the islands of Pola and Manofa. It is the only part of the park accessible by car and attracts the vast majority of visitors to the area. The park lands include a trail to the top of Mount Alava and historic World War II gun emplacement sites at Breakers Point and Blunt's Point.[4] The trail runs along the ridge in dense forest, north of which the land slopes steeply away to the ocean.[5]
Manua Island group[edit]
Ofu Unit[edit]
Ofu island is only accessible via small fisherman boats from Ta'u island. Accommodations are available on Ofu.
Ta‘ū Unit[edit]
Ta‘ū island can be reached by a flight from Tutuila to Fiti‘uta village on Ta‘ū. Accommodations are available on Ta‘ū. A trail runs from Saua around Si’u Point to the southern coastline and stairs to the 3,170-foot (970m) summit of Lata Mountain.
Biodiversity[edit]
Because of its remote location, diversity among the terrestrial species is low. Approximately 30% of the plants and one bird species (the Samoan starling) are endemic to the archipelago.[6]
The Many-coloured Fruit-dove has been found in the park.
Fauna[edit]
Three species of bat are the only native mammals: two large fruit bats (Samoa flying fox and white-naped flying fox) and a small insectivore, the Pacific sheath-tailed bat. They serve an important role in pollinating the island's plants. The sheath-tailed bat was nearly eliminated by Cyclone Val in 1991. Native reptiles include the pelagic gecko, Polynesian gecko, mourning gecko, stump-toed gecko, Pacific boa and seven skink species.[7] A major role for the park is to control and eradicate invasive plant and animal species such as feral pigs, which threaten the park's ecosystem. There are several bird species, the most predominant being the wattled honeyeater, Samoan starling, and Pacific pigeon.[8] Other unusual birds include the Tahiti petrel, the spotless crake, and the rare (in this locality) many-coloured fruit dove.[6]
Flora[edit]
The islands are mostly covered by tropical rainforest, including cloud forest on Ta'u and lowland ridge forest on Tutuila. Most plants arrived by chance from Southeast Asia. There are 343 flowering plants, 135 ferns and about 30% are endemic plant species.
Marine[edit]
The surrounding waters are filled with a diversity of marine life, including sea turtles, humpback whales, over 950 species of fish, and over 250 coral species. Some of the largest living coral colonies (Porites) in the world are at Ta'u island.
History[edit]
The National Park of American Samoa was established on October 31, 1988 by Public Law 100-571[9] but the NPS could not buy the land because of traditional communal land system. This was resolved on September 9, 1993, when the National Park Service entered into a 50-year lease for the park land from the Samoan village councils. In 2002, Congress approved a thirty percent expansion on Olosega and Ofu islands.[10]
In 2009 an earthquake and tsunami produced several large waves, resulting in 34 confirmed deaths, more than a hundred injuries and the destruction of about 200 homes and businesses. The park encountered major damage. The visitor center and main office were destroyed but there was only one reported injury among the NPS staff and volunteers.[11]
Geologic History[edit]
The volcanic islands of Samoa that dominate the acreage of the national park are composed of shield volcanoes which developed from a hot spot on the Pacific Plate, emerging sequentially from west to east. Tutulia, the largest and oldest island, probably dates from the Pliocene Epoch, approximately 1.24 to 1.4 million years ago, while the smaller islands are most likely Holocene in age.
The islands are not made up of individual volcanoes, but are rather composed of overlapping and superimposed shield volcanoes built by basalt lava flows. Much of the lava that erupted has since broken into angular fragments known as breccia. The volcanoes emerged from the intrusion of basaltic dikes from a rift zone on the ocean floor during the Pliocene Epoch, and were heavily eroded during the Pliocene and early Pleistocene Epochs, leaving behind trachyte plugs and exposed outcrops of volcanic tuff throughout the park. Ta'u island, the youngest of the islands included within the national park, is all that remains from the collapse of a shield volcano during Holocene time. This collapse produced sea cliffs over 3,000 feet high on the north side of the island, some of the highest such escarpments in the world.
While the Samoan islands have not shown evidence of volcanism for many years, the hot spot beneath the islands continues to give indications of activity, with a submarine eruption detected just east of American Samoa in 1973. The Vailulu'u Seamount, located east of Ta'u, is a future Samoan island developing from submarine lava flows, continuing the eastward progress of volcanic development from the hotspot below the islands. The lava flows forming the seamount have been dated by radiometric methods to between 5 and 50 years, during which time the seamount has risen 14,764 feet from the ocean floor.
Evidence exists of past submarine and surface landslides as a result of weathering and other forms of erosion of the rocks and soil making up the islands. On Ta'u island, an inland escarpment known as Liu Bench (a feature of mass wasting) threatens to slump into the nearby ocean, an event which could produce a tsunami strong enough to devastate the island of Fiji to the southeast.[12]
Threats[edit]
The coral reefs are under significant threat due to rising ocean temperatures and carbon dioxide concentration, as well as sea level rise. As a result of these and other stresses, the corals that form the reefs are projected to be lost by mid-century if carbon dioxide concentrations continue to rise at their current rate.[13]
See also[edit]
Samoan plant names
List of birds of Samoa
Old Vatia, an important archaeological site in the park
References[edit]
^ "Listing of acreage as of December 31, 2011". Land Resource Division, National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-05.
^ "NPS Annual Recreation Visits Report". National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-05.
^ "The National Parks: Index 2009–2011". National Park Service. Retrieved 2011-03-05.
^ "Hiking and Beachwalking". National Park Service. Retrieved 2009-01-30.
^ National Geographic Guide to the National Parks of the United States. National Geographic Society. 2006. ISBN0-7922-5322-1.
^ a b Hart, Risé (2005-02-14). "Pacific Island Network Vital Signs Monitoring Plan--Appendix A: National Park of American Samoa Resource Overview" (PDF). National Park Service. Retrieved 2009-01-30.
^ National Park home page, retrieved 2009-10-01
^ Craig, P. "Natural History Guide to American Samoa" (PDF). National Park of American Samoa, Department Marine and Wildlife Resources, American Samoa Community College. Retrieved 2009-08-16.
^ "Public Law No: 100-571". Library of Congress: THOMAS. 1988-10-31. Retrieved 2009-01-30.
^ "Public Law No: 107-336". Library of Congress: THOMAS. 2002-12-16. Retrieved 2009-01-30.
^ "American Samoa Earthquake and Tsunami Damage" (PDF). Department of the Interior. Retrieved 2011-08-27.
^ Ann G. Harris, et al., The Geology of National Parks,(Dubuque, Iowa: Kendall-Hunt, 2004)
^ Report to the Congress Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States, 2009
Bibliography[edit]
The National Parks: Index 2001–2003. Washington: U.S. Department of the Interior.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Park of American Samoa.
 National Park of American Samoa travel guide from Wikivoyage
National Park Service: National Park of American Samoa
National Park Service map of the Manu‘a Islands showing the present park boundaries (pdf).
Seacology National Park of American Samoa projects Seacology
Birds of the National Park of American Samoa
v
t
e
Territory of American Samoa
Pago Pago (capital), Fagatogo (seat of government)
Topics
Bibliography
History
Geography
Birds
Mammals
National Park
Superfund sites
Politics
Constitution
Delegates to US Congress
Elections
Government
Governor
First Lady
Lieutenant Governor
High Court
Judiciary
Law enforcement
Legislature
House of Representatives
Senate
Political party strength
Economy
Telecommunications
Internet domain
Transportation
airports
Culture
Anthem
Demographics
Flag
Human rights
LGBT
Music
People
Religion
Islam
Seal
Sports
Soccer
Districts
Eastern District
Western District
Manu'a District
Islands
Tutuila
Aunu'u
Ta'ū
Ofu‑Olosega
Rose Atoll
Swains Island
Villages
Aasu
Afao
Afono
Agugulu
Alao
Alega
Alofau
Amaluia
'Amanave
Amaua
Amouli
Anua
'Aoa
A'oloau
Asili
Atu'u
Aua
'Au'asi
Aumi
Aunu'u
Auto
Avaio
Faga'alu
Faga'itua
Fagali'i
Fagamalo
Faganeanea
Fagasa
Failolo
Faleasao
Faleniu
Fatumafuti
Futiga
'Ili'ili
Lauli'i
Leloaloa
Leone
Leusoali'i
Luma
Maia
Malaeimi
Malaeloa/Aitulagi
Malaeloa/Ituau
Maloata
Mapusagafou
Masausi
Masefau
Matu'u
Mesepa
Nu'uuli
Nua
Ofu
Olosega
Onenoa
Pagai
Pava'ia'i
Poloa
Sa'ilele
Se'etaga
Si'ufaga
Sili
Taulaga
Tafuna
Taputimu
Tula
Utulei
Utumea East
Utumea West
Vailoatai
Vaitogi
Vatia
v
t
e
National parks of the United States
Acadia
American Samoa
Arches
Badlands
Big Bend
Biscayne
Black Canyon of the Gunnison
Bryce Canyon
Canyonlands
Capitol Reef
Carlsbad Caverns
Channel Islands
Congaree
Crater Lake
Cuyahoga Valley
Death Valley
Denali
Dry Tortugas
Everglades
Gates of the Arctic
Glacier
Glacier Bay
Grand Canyon
Grand Teton
Great Basin
Great Sand Dunes
Great Smoky Mountains
Guadalupe Mountains
Haleakalā
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes
Hot Springs
Isle Royale
Joshua Tree
Katmai
Kenai Fjords
Kings Canyon
Kobuk Valley
Lake Clark
Lassen Volcanic
Mammoth Cave
Mesa Verde
Mount Rainier
North Cascades
Olympic
Petrified Forest
Pinnacles
Redwood
Rocky Mountain
Saguaro
Sequoia
Shenandoah
Theodore Roosevelt
Virgin Islands
Voyageurs
Wind Cave
Wrangell–St. Elias
Yellowstone
Yosemite
Zion
List of national parks of the United States (by elevation)
v
t
e
Protected areas of American Samoa
National Parks
American Samoa
National Marine Sanctuary
American Samoa
National Wildlife Refuges
Rose Atoll Marine National Monument
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Park_of_American_Samoa&amp;oldid=698775021"					
				Categories: IUCN Category IINational parks of the United StatesProtected areas of American SamoaGeography of American SamoaProtected areas established in 1988Conservation in SamoaBiota of SamoaFlora of SamoaHidden categories: Coordinates on WikidataCommons category with page title same as on Wikidata				
			Navigation menu
						Personal tools
							Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in						
						Namespaces
															Article
															Talk
							Variants
						Views
															Read
															Edit
															View history
						More
							Search
			Navigation
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
			Interaction
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
			Tools
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
			Print/export
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
			Languages
						العربيةAzərbaycancaБългарскиCatalàDeutschEestiEspañolفارسیFrançaisHrvatskiItalianoעבריתქართულიNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålPolskiPortuguêsРусскийSuomiSvenskaTürkçe中文					
				Edit links			
											 This page was last modified on 8 January 2016, at 04:25.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											Cookie statement
											Mobile view

