Olympic National Park - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Location of Olympic National Park
Location
Jefferson, Clallam, Mason, and Grays Harbor counties, Washington, USA
Nearestcity
Port Angeles
Coordinates
47°58′10″N 123°29′55″W﻿ / ﻿47.96935°N 123.49856°W﻿ / 47.96935; -123.49856Coordinates: 47°58′10″N 123°29′55″W﻿ / ﻿47.96935°N 123.49856°W﻿ / 47.96935; -123.49856
Area
922,650 acres (373,380ha)[1]
Established
June 29, 1938
Visitors
2,966,502 (in2011)[2]
Governingbody
National Park Service
UNESCO World Heritage Site
Type
Natural
Criteria
vii, ix
Designated
1981 (5th session)
Referenceno.
151
State Party
United States
Region
Europe and North America
Olympic National Park is a United States national park located in the state of Washington, on the Olympic Peninsula.[3] The park has four basic regions: the Pacific coastline, alpine areas, the west side temperate rainforest and the forests of the drier east side.[4]
U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt originally created Mount Olympus National Monument on 2 March 1909.[5] [6]It was designated a national park by President Franklin Roosevelt on June 29, 1938. In 1976, Olympic National Park became an International Biosphere Reserve, and in 1981 it was designated a World Heritage Site. In 1988, Congress designated 95 percent of the park as the Olympic Wilderness.[7][8]
Contents
1 Natural/Geologic history
1.1 Coastline
1.2 Glaciated mountains
1.3 Temperate rainforest
1.4 Ecology
2 Climate
3 Human history
4 Fauna
5 Recreation
6 Elwha Ecosystem Restoration Project
7 See also
8 References
9 External links and literature
Natural/Geologic history[edit]
Coastline[edit]
The coastal portion of the park is a rugged, sandy beach along with a strip of adjacent forest. It is 60 miles (97km) long but just a few miles wide, with native communities at the mouths of two rivers. The Hoh River has the Hoh people and at the town of La Push at the mouth of the Quileute River live the Quileute.[9]
Tide pools form at low tide
The beach has unbroken stretches of wilderness ranging from 10 to 20 miles (16 to 32km). While some beaches are primarily sand, others are covered with heavy rock and very large boulders. Bushy overgrowth, slippery footing, tides and misty rain forest weather all hinder foot travel. (Times to hike should typically be doubled.) The coastal strip is more readily accessible than the interior of the Olympics; due to the difficult terrain, very few backpackers venture beyond casual day-hiking distances.
The most popular piece of the coastal strip is the 9-mile (14km) Ozette Loop. The Park Service runs a registration and reservation program to control usage levels of this area. From the trailhead at Ozette Lake, a 3-mile (4.8km) leg of the trail is a boardwalk-enhanced path through near primal coastal cedar swamp. Arriving at the ocean, it is a 3-mile walk supplemented by headland trails for high tides. This area has traditionally been favored by the Makah from Neah Bay. The third 3-mile leg is enabled by a boardwalk which has enhanced the loop's popularity.
Foggy sea stacks
There are thick groves of trees adjacent to the sand, which results in chunks of timber from fallen trees on the beach. The mostly unaltered Hoh River, toward the south end of the park, discharges large amounts of naturally eroded timber and other drift, which moves north, enriching the beaches. The removal of driftwood – logs, dead-heads, tops and root-wads from streams and beaches was a major domestication measure across North America. Even today driftwood deposits form a commanding presence, biologically as well as visually, giving a taste of the original condition of the beach viewable to some extent in early photos. Drift-material often comes from a considerable distance; the Columbia River formerly contributed huge amounts to the Northwest Pacific coasts.
The smaller coastal portion of the park is separated from the larger, inland portion. President Franklin D. Roosevelt originally had supported connecting them with a continuous strip of park land.
A 3D computer generated aerial view
The park is known for its unique turbidites. It has very exposed turbidities with white calcite veins. Turbidites are rocks or sediments that travel into the ocean as suspended particles in the flow of water, causing a sedimentary layering effect on the ocean floor. Over time the sediments and rock compact and the process repeats as a constant cycle. The park also is known for its tectonic mélanges that have been deemed 'smell rocks' by the locals due to its strong petroleum odor. Mélanges are large individual rocks that are large enough that they are accounted for in map drawings. The Olympic mélanges can be as large as a house.
Glaciated mountains[edit]
The summit of Mount Olympus from the Blue Glacier
Subalpine fir in a meadow on Hurricane Ridge
Within the center of Olympic National Park rise the Olympic Mountains whose sides and ridgelines are topped with massive, ancient glaciers. The mountains themselves are products of accretionary wedge uplifting related to the Juan De Fuca Plate subduction zone. The geologic composition is a curious mélange of basaltic and oceanic sedimentary rock. The western half of the range is dominated by the peak of Mount Olympus, which rises to 7,965 feet (2,428m). Mount Olympus receives a large amount of snow, and consequently has the greatest glaciation of any non-volcanic peak in the contiguous United States outside of the North Cascades. It has several glaciers, the largest of which is the Hoh Glacier, nearly five kilometers in length. Looking to the east, the range becomes much drier due to the rain shadow of the western mountains. Here, there are numerous high peaks and craggy ridges. The tallest summit of this area is Mount Deception, at 7,788 feet (2,374m).
Temperate rainforest[edit]
Elk grazing on a field by the Hoh Rainforest
Moss draped bigleaf maples near the Hoh River
Downed western redcedar
The western side of the park is mantled by temperate rainforests, including the Hoh Rainforest and Quinault Rainforest, which receive annual precipitation of about 150 inches (380cm), making this perhaps the wettest area in the continental United States (the island of Kauai in the state of Hawaii gets more rain).[10]
As opposed to tropical rainforests and most other temperate rainforest regions, the rainforests of the Pacific Northwest are dominated by coniferous trees, including Sitka Spruce, Western Hemlock, Coast Douglas-fir and Western redcedar. Mosses coat the bark of these trees and even drip down from their branches in green, moist tendrils.
Valleys on the eastern side of the park also have notable old-growth forest, but the climate is notably drier. Sitka Spruce is absent, trees on average are somewhat smaller, and undergrowth is generally less dense and different in character. Immediately northeast of the park is a rather small rainshadow area where annual precipitation averages about 16inches.[11]
Ecology[edit]
Varileaf cinquefoil along the Hurricane Hill trail
Because the park sits on an isolated peninsula, with a high mountain range dividing it from the land to the south, it developed many endemic plant and animal species (like the Olympic Marmot, Piper's bellflower and Flett's violet). The southwestern coastline of the Olympic Peninsula is also the northernmost non-glaciated region on the Pacific coast of North America, with the result that – aided by the distance from peaks to the coast at the Last Glacial Maximum being about twice what it is today – it served as a refuge from which plants colonized glaciated regions to the north.
Black-tailed deer
It also provides habitat for many species (like the Roosevelt elk) that are native only to the Pacific Northwest coast. Because of this importance, scientists have declared it to be a biological reserve, and study its unique species to better understand how plants and animals evolve. The park is home to sizable populations of black bears and Black-tailed deer. The park also has a noteworthy cougar population, numbering about 150.[12] Mountain goats were accidentally introduced into the park into the 1920s and have caused much damage on the native flora. The NPS has activated management plans to control the goats.[13] The park contains an estimated 366,000 acres (572sqmi; 1,480km2) of old-growth forests.[14]
Forest fires are infrequent in the park. A severe drought after the driest spring in 100years coupled with an extremely low snowpack from the preceding winter resulted in a rare rainforest fire in the summer of 2015.[1]
Climate[edit]
Climate data for Elwha Ranger Station, 1948-2006
Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year
Record high °F (°C)
64
(18)
67
(19)
69
(21)
78
(26)
87
(31)
93
(34)
96
(36)
97
(36)
91
(33)
76
(24)
70
(21)
65
(18)
97
(36)
Average high °F (°C)
40.7
(4.8)
44.9
(7.2)
50.3
(10.2)
56.9
(13.8)
63.5
(17.5)
68.1
(20.1)
73.8
(23.2)
74.1
(23.4)
68.5
(20.3)
56.9
(13.8)
46.4
(8)
42.0
(5.6)
57.2
(14)
Average low °F (°C)
31.1
(−0.5)
32.3
(0.2)
34.1
(1.2)
37.3
(2.9)
42.0
(5.6)
46.6
(8.1)
49.9
(9.9)
50.9
(10.5)
47.5
(8.6)
41.1
(5.1)
35.7
(2.1)
32.7
(0.4)
40.1
(4.5)
Record low °F (°C)
2
(−17)
8
(−13)
15
(−9)
26
(−3)
29
(−2)
32
(0)
36
(2)
36
(2)
32
(0)
21
(−6)
10
(−12)
8
(−13)
2
(−17)
Average precipitation inches (mm)
9.02
(229.1)
6.90
(175.3)
6.02
(152.9)
3.27
(83.1)
1.84
(46.7)
1.20
(30.5)
0.75
(19)
1.21
(30.7)
1.77
(45)
5.27
(133.9)
9.17
(232.9)
9.88
(251)
56.3
(1,430.1)
Average snowfall inches (cm)
7.1
(18)
2.0
(5.1)
1.2
(3)
0
(0)
0
(0)
0
(0)
0
(0)
0
(0)
0
(0)
0
(0)
1.1
(2.8)
3.1
(7.9)
14.5
(36.8)
Average precipitation days
17
15
16
13
11
9
5
6
8
14
18
17
149
Source: "ELWHA RANGER STN, WASHINGTON". Western Regional Climate Center.
Human history[edit]
Prior to the influx of European settlers, Olympic's human population consisted of Native Americans, whose use of the peninsula was thought to have consisted mainly of fishing and hunting. However, recent reviews of the record, coupled with systematic archaeological surveys of the mountains (Olympic and other Northwest ranges) are pointing to much more extensive tribal use of especially the subalpine meadows than seemed formerly to be the case. Most if not all Pacific Northwest indigenous cultures were adversely affected by European diseases (often decimated) and other factors, well before ethnographers, business operations and settlers arrived in the region, so what they saw and recorded was a much-reduced native culture-base. Large numbers of cultural sites are now identified in the Olympic mountains, and important artifacts have been found.
When settlers began to appear, extractive industry in the Pacific Northwest was on the rise, particularly in regards to the harvesting of timber, which began heavily in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Public dissent against logging began to take hold in the 1920s, when people got their first glimpses of the clear-cut hillsides. This period saw an explosion of people's interest in the outdoors; with the growing use of the automobile, people took to touring previously remote places like the Olympic Peninsula.
The formal record of a proposal for a new national park on the Olympic Peninsula begins with the expeditions of well-known figures Lieutenant Joseph O'Neil and Judge James Wickersham, during the 1890s. These notables met in the Olympic wilderness while exploring, and subsequently combined their political efforts to have the area placed within some protected status. Following unsuccessful efforts in the Washington State Legislature in the early 1900s, President Theodore Roosevelt created Mount Olympus National Monument in 1909, primarily to protect the subalpine calving grounds and summer range of the Roosevelt elk herds native to the Olympics.
Public desire for preservation of some of the area grew until President Franklin D. Roosevelt declared ONP a national park in 1938. Even after ONP was declared a park, though, illegal logging continued in the park, and political battles continue to this day over the incredibly valuable timber contained within its boundaries. Logging continues on the Olympic Peninsula, but not within the park. A book detailing the history of the fight for ONP's timber is Olympic Battleground: The Power Politics of Timber Preservation by Carsten Lien.
Fauna[edit]
See also: Mammals of Olympic National Park
Animals that inhabit this national park are chipmunks, squirrels, skunks, six species of bats, weasels, coyotes, muskrats, fishers, river otters, beavers, red foxes, mountain goats, martens, bobcats, black bears, Canadian lynxes, moles, snowshoe hares, shrews, and mountain lions. Whales, dolphins, sea lions, seals, and sea otters swim near this park offshore. Birds that fly in this park including raptors are Winter wrens, and gray jays, Hammond's flycatchers, Wilson's warblers, Blue Grouses, Pine siskins, ravens, spotted owls, Red-breasted nuthatches, Golden-crowned kinglets, Chestnut-backed chickadees, Swainson's thrushes, Red crossbills, Hermit thrushes, Olive-sided flycatchers, bald eagles, Western tanagers, Northern pygmy owls, Townsend's warblers, Townsend's solitaires, Vaux's swifts, band-tailed pigeons, and evening grosbeaks.
Recreation[edit]
Camping site on the shores of Lake Quinault
There are several roads in the park, but none penetrate far into the interior. The park features a network of hiking trails, although the size and remoteness means that it will usually take more than a weekend to get to the high country in the interior. The sights of the rain forest, with plants run riot and dozens of hues of green, are well worth the possibility of rain sometime during the trip, although months of July, August and September frequently have long dry spells.
A short hike leads to Sol Duc Falls
An unusual feature of ONP is the opportunity for backpacking along the beach. The length of the coastline in the park is sufficient for multi-day trips, with the entire day spent walking along the beach. Although idyllic compared to toiling up a mountainside (Seven Lakes Basin is a notable example), one must be aware of the tide; at the narrowest parts of the beaches, high tide washes up to the cliffs behind, blocking passage. There are also several promontories that must be struggled over, using a combination of muddy steep trail and fixed ropes.
During winter, the popular viewpoint known as Hurricane Ridge offers numerous winter sports activities. The Hurricane Ridge Winter Sports Club operates Hurricane Ridge Ski and Snowboard Area, a not for profit alpine ski area which offers ski lessons, rentals, and inexpensive lift tickets. The small alpine area is serviced by two rope tows and one poma lift. A large amount of backcountry terrain is accessible for skiers, snowboarders, and other backcountry travelers when the Hurricane Ridge Road is open. Winter access to the Hurricane Ridge Road is currently limited to Friday through Sunday weather permitting. The Hurricane Ridge Winter Access Coalition is a community effort to restore seven-day-a-week access via the Hurricane Ridge Road (the only park road accessing alpine terrain in winter).
Rafting is available on both the Elwha and Hoh Rivers.
Hurricane Ridge trail west of the visitor center.
Spectacular views of the Olympic National Park can be seen from the Hurricane Ridge viewpoint. The road leading west from the Hurricane Ridge visitor center is dotted with picnic areas and trail heads. A paved trail called the Hurricane hill trail is popular with visitors, and is about 1.6 miles long (one-way) with an elevation gain of about 700 ft. It is not uncommon to find snow on the trails even as late as July. Several other dirt trails of varying distances and difficulty levels branch off of the Hurricane hill trail. The picnic areas are open only in the summer, and have restrooms, water and paved access to picnic tables.
The Hurricane Ridge visitor center offers several conveniences, including an information desk, gift shop, restrooms, and a snack bar. The exhibits in the visitor center are open daily.
Panoramic view of the Olympic National Park as seen from near the Hurricane Ridge visitor center. The visitor center itself is visible on the right of the image.
Elwha Ecosystem Restoration Project[edit]
The Elwha Ecosystem Restoration Project is the second largest ecosystem restoration project in the history of the National Park Service after the Everglades. It consisted of removing the 210 feet (64m) Glines Canyon Dam and draining its reservoir, Lake Mills and removing the 108 feet (33m) Elwha Dam and its reservoir Lake Aldwell from the Elwha River. Upon removal, the park will revegetate the slopes and river bottoms to prevent erosion and speed up ecological recovery. The primary purpose of this project is to restore anadromous stocks of Pacific Salmon and steelhead to the Elwha River, which have been denied access to the upper 65 miles (105km) of river habitat for more than 95 years by these dams. Removal of the dams was completed in 2014.
See also[edit]
Amphibians and reptiles of Olympic National Park
Mammals of Olympic National Park
Ruby Beach
National Register of Historic Places listings in Olympic National Park
Olympic Mountains
References[edit]
^ "Listing of acreage as of December 31, 2011". Land Resource Division, National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-07.
^ "NPS Annual Recreation Visits Report". National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-07.
^ "Olympic National Park: Directions". National Park Service. Retrieved 2014-11-11.
^ "The Economy of the Olympic Peninsula and Potential Impacts of the Draft Congressional Watershed Conservation Proposal" (PDF). Headwaters Economics (Bozeman, Montana). p.6. Retrieved 2014-11-11.
^ "Park Newsletter July/August 2009". National Park Service. Retrieved 2011-07-08.
^ http://www.nps.gov/legal/Proclamations_and_Orders/Proclamations_and_Orders_Vol_II/17_Appendix_III.pdf
^ "The National Parks Index 2009–2011". National Park Service. Retrieved 2011-07-08.
^ "Olympic Wilderness". Wilderness.net. Retrieved 2011-07-08.
^ "Olympic National Park: Coast". National Park Service. Retrieved 2009-08-23.
^ "City of Sequim". Retrieved 2011-07-08.
^ "Monthly Averages for Sequim, WA". The Weather Channel. Retrieved 2011-07-08.
^ "Cougar warning". Kitsap Sun (17 May 1992). Retrieved January 8, 2014.
^ "Mountain Goats in Olympic National Park: Biology and Management of an Introduced Species". National Park Service. Retrieved January 8, 2014.
^ Bolsinger, Charles L.; Waddell, Karen L. (1993). "Area of old-growth forests in California, Oregon, and Washington" (PDF). United States Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station. Resource Bulletin PNW-RB-197.
External links and literature[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Olympic National Park.
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Olympic National Park.
"Olympic National Park". National Park Service. Retrieved 2011-07-08.
"The Pacific Northwest Olympic Peninsula Community Museum". University of Washington. Retrieved 2011-07-08.
"The Evergreen Playground Online museum". University of Washington. Retrieved 2011-07-08.
Olympic National Park Documentary produced by Full Focus
"Winter Access".
v
t
e
National parks of the United States
Acadia
American Samoa
Arches
Badlands
Big Bend
Biscayne
Black Canyon of the Gunnison
Bryce Canyon
Canyonlands
Capitol Reef
Carlsbad Caverns
Channel Islands
Congaree
Crater Lake
Cuyahoga Valley
Death Valley
Denali
Dry Tortugas
Everglades
Gates of the Arctic
Glacier
Glacier Bay
Grand Canyon
Grand Teton
Great Basin
Great Sand Dunes
Great Smoky Mountains
Guadalupe Mountains
Haleakalā
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes
Hot Springs
Isle Royale
Joshua Tree
Katmai
Kenai Fjords
Kings Canyon
Kobuk Valley
Lake Clark
Lassen Volcanic
Mammoth Cave
Mesa Verde
Mount Rainier
North Cascades
Olympic
Petrified Forest
Pinnacles
Redwood
Rocky Mountain
Saguaro
Sequoia
Shenandoah
Theodore Roosevelt
Virgin Islands
Voyageurs
Wind Cave
Wrangell–St. Elias
Yellowstone
Yosemite
Zion
List of national parks of the United States (by elevation)
v
t
e
World Heritage Sites in the United States
Northeast
Independence Hall
Statue of Liberty
Midwest
Cahokia
South
Everglades
Great Smoky Mountains
Mammoth Cave
Monticello and the University of Virginia
Poverty Point
San Antonio Missions
West
Carlsbad Caverns
Chaco Culture National Historical Park
Grand Canyon National Park
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park
Kluane-Wrangell–St. Elias-Glacier Bay-Tatshenshini-Alsek1
Mesa Verde
Olympic National Park
Pueblo de Taos
Papahānaumokuākea
Redwood
Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park1
Yellowstone National Park
Yosemite National Park
Territories
La Fortaleza and San Juan National Historic Site
1 Shared with Canada
v
t
e
Protected areas of Washington
Federal
National Parks
Mount Rainier
North Cascades
Olympic
National Monuments
Hanford Reach (USFWS)
Mount St. Helens Volcanic (USFS)
San Juan Islands (BLM)
National Historical
Parks &amp; Sites
Fort Vancouver NHS
Klondike Gold Rush NHP
Manhattan Project NHP
Nez Perce NHP
San Juan Island NHP
Whitman Mission NHS
National Historical Reserves
Ebey's Landing
National Trails
Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail
Pacific Crest Trail
Pacific Northwest National Scenic Trail
NPS National Recreation Areas
Lake Chelan
Lake Roosevelt
Ross Lake
National Wildlife Refuges
Billy Frank Jr. Nisqually
Columbia
Conboy Lake
Copalis
Dungeness
Flattery Rocks
Franz Lake
Grays Harbor
Julia Butler Hansen Refuge for the Columbian White-Tailed Deer
Little Pend Oreille
McNary
Pierce
Protection Island
Quillayute Needles
Ridgefield
Saddle Mountain
San Juan Islands
Steigerwald Lake
Toppenish
Turnbull
Umatilla
Willapa
National Forests
Colville
Gifford Pinchot
Idaho Panhandle
Kaniksu
Mount Baker-Snoqualmie
Okanogan
Olympic
Umatilla
Wenatchee
USFS National Recreation Areas
Mount Baker
National Wilderness
Alpine Lakes
Boulder River
Brothers
Buckhorn
Clearwater
Colonel Bob
Glacier Peak
Glacier View
Goat Rocks
Henry M. Jackson
Indian Heaven
Juniper Dunes
Lake Chelan-Sawtooth Ridge
Mount Adams
Mount Baker
Mount Rainier
Mount Skokomish
Noisy-Diobsud
Norse Peak
Olympic
Pasayten
Salmo-Priest
San Juan
Stephen Mather
Tatoosh
Trapper Creek
Washington Islands
Wenaha–Tucannon
Wild Sky
William O. Douglas
Wonder Mountain
National Marine Sanctuary &amp;
Estuarine Research Reserve
Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary
Padilla Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve
National Wild and Scenic Rivers
Klickitat
Skagit
White Salmon
State
State Parks
Alta Lake
Anderson Lake
Battle Ground Lake
Bay View
Beacon Rock
Belfair
Birch Bay
Blake Island
Blind Island
Bogachiel
Bottle Beach
Bridgeport
Bridle Trails
Brooks Memorial
Cama Beach
Camano Island
Camp Wooten Retreat Center
Cape Disappointment
Centennial Trail
Clark Island
Columbia Hills
Columbia Plateau Trail
Conconully
Crawford
Curlew Lake
Cutts Island
Daroga
Dash Point
Deception Pass
Doe Island
Dosewallips
Doug's Beach
Eagle Island
Federation Forest
Fields Spring
Flaming Geyser
Fort Casey
Fort Columbia
Fort Ebey
Fort Flagler
Fort Simcoe
Fort Townsend
Fort Worden
Ginkgo Petrified Forest
Goldendale Observatory
Grayland Beach
Griffiths-Priday Ocean
Harstine Island
Hope Island (Mason County)
Hope Island (Skagit County)
Ike Kinswa
Illahee
Iron Horse
James Island
Jarrell Cove
Joemma Beach
Jones Island
Joseph Whidbey
Kanaskat-Palmer
Kinney Point
Kitsap Memorial
Kopachuck
Lake Chelan
Lake Easton
Lake Sammamish
Lake Sylvia
Lake Wenatchee
Larrabee
Leadbetter Point
Lewis and Clark
Lewis and Clark Trail
Lime Kiln Point
Lincoln Rock
Manchester
Maryhill
Matia Island
McMicken Island
Millersylvania
Moran
Mount Pilchuck
Mount Spokane
Mystery Bay
Nine Mile Recreation Area
Nolte
Obstruction Pass
Ocean City
Olallie
Olmstead Place
Pacific Beach
Pacific Pines
Palouse Falls
Paradise Point
Patos Island
Peace Arch
Pearrygin Lake
Penrose Point
Peshastin Pinnacles
Pleasant Harbor
Posey Island
Potholes
Potlatch
Rainbow Falls
Rasar
Reed Island
Riverside
Rockport
Sacajawea
Saddlebag Island
Saint Edward
Saltwater
Scenic Beach
Schafer
Seaquest
Sequim Bay
Shine Tidelands
Skagit Island
Skull Island
South Whidbey Island
Spencer Spit
Spring Creek Hatchery
Squak Mountain
Squilchuck
Steamboat Rock
Steptoe Battlefield
Steptoe Butte
Stretch Point
Stuart Island
Sucia Island
Sun Lakes-Dry Falls
Tolmie
Triton Cove
Turn Island
Twanoh
Twenty-Five Mile Creek
Twin Harbors
Upright Channel
Wallace Falls
Wanapum Recreational Area
Wenatchee Confluence
Westhaven
Westport Light
Yakima Sportsman
State Forests
Ahtanum
Capitol
Elbe Hills
Green Mountain
Loomis
Loup Loup
Tahuya
Tiger Mountain
Yacolt Burn
Natural Area Preserves
Admiralty Inlet
Badger Gulch
Bald Hill
Barker Mountain
Bone River
Camas Meadows
Carlisle Bog
Castle Rock
Charley Creek
Chehalis River Surge Plain
Chopaka Mountain
Clearwater Bogs
Cleveland Shrub Steppe
Columbia Falls
Columbia Hills
Cypress Highlands
Dabob Bay
Dailey Prairie
Davis Canyon
Entiat Slopes
Goose Island
Gunpowder Island
Hamma Hamma Balds
Ink Blot
Kahlotus Ridgetop
Kennedy Creek
Kings Lake Bog
Kitsap Forest
Lacamas Prairie Natural Area
Little Pend Oreille River
Marcellus Shrub Steppe
Methow Rapids
Mima Mounds
Monte Cristo
Niawiakum River
North Bay
Oak Patch
Olivine Bridge
Pinecroft
Point Doughty
Riverside Breaks
Rocky Prairie
Sand Island
Schumacher Creek
Selah Cliffs
Skagit Bald Eagle
Skookum Inlet
Snoqualmie Bog
Spring Creek Canyon
Trout Lake
The Two-Steppe
Upper Dry Gulch
Washougal Oaks Natural Area
Whitcomb Flats
Willapa Divide
Natural Resources
Conservation Areas
Cattle Point
Clearwater Corridor
Cypress Island
Devils Lake
Dishman Hills
Elk River
Ellsworth Creek
Granite Lakes
Hat Island
Hendrickson Canyon
Klickitat Canyon
Lake Louise
Loomis
Lummi Island
Merrill Lake
Middle Fork Snoqualmie
Morning Star
Mount Si
Rattlesnake Mountain Scenic Area
Shipwreck Point
South Nemah
South Nolan
Stavis
Table Mountain
Tahoma Forest
Teal Slough
Washougal Oaks Natural Area
West Tiger Mountain
White Salmon Oak
Woodard Bay
Other
Former state parks
Damon Point
Fay Bainbridge
Fort Okanogan
Fort Ward Park
Griffin Bay
Lyons Ferry Park
Mukilteo Lighthouse Park
Osoyoos Lake Veteran's Memorial Park
Wenberg
Blanchard Forest
Cascadia Marine Trail
The Enchantments
Goose Island
Les Hilde Trail &amp; Trailheads
Little Pend Oreille
Mount Adams Recreation Area
Sehome Hill Arboretum
Walker Valley ORV Riding Area
Withrow Moraine
Yellow Island
v
t
e
National Park Travelers Club Conventions
2003: Delaware Water Gap National Recreation Area
2004: Rocky Mountain National Park
2005: Mammoth Cave National Park
2006: Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore
2007: Olympic National Park
2008: Lowell National Historical Park
2009: Sequoia National Park
2010: El Malpais National Monument
2011: National Mall
2012: Apostle Islands National Lakeshore
2013: Shiloh National Military Park
2014: Klondike Gold Rush National Historical Park
2015: Chamizal National Memorial
2016 (planned): Independence National Historical Park
Authority control
VIAF: 132891473
GND: 4197819-5
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Olympic_National_Park&amp;oldid=701882566"					
				Categories: IUCN Category IIOlympic National ParkWorld Heritage Sites in the United StatesBiosphere reserves of the United StatesProtected areas established in 1938Forests of Washington (state)Parks in Clallam County, WashingtonParks in Grays Harbor County, WashingtonParks in Jefferson County, WashingtonParks in Mason County, Washington1938 establishments in Washington (state)Hidden categories: Coordinates on WikidataArticles which use infobox templates with no data rowsWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiers				
			Navigation menu
						Personal tools
							Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in						
						Namespaces
															Article
															Talk
							Variants
						Views
															Read
															Edit
															View history
						More
							Search
			Navigation
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
			Interaction
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
			Tools
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
			Print/export
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
			Languages
						العربيةБеларускаяБългарскиCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançaisHrvatskiItalianoעבריתქართულიLietuviųമലയാളംNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålଓଡ଼ିଆپنجابیPolskiPortuguêsРусскийShqipSuomiSvenskaTürkçeУкраїнськаTiếng ViệtWinaray中文					
				Edit links			
											 This page was last modified on 27 January 2016, at 03:50.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											Cookie statement
											Mobile view

