                To use Outlook Web App, browser settings must allow scripts to run. For information about how to allow scripts, consult the Help for your browser. If your browser doesn&#39;t support scripts, you can download Windows Internet Explorer for access to Outlook Web App.
                User name:
                Password:
                    Show password
                    Private computer
                    &#x200E;(
                    What is this?
                        Hide explanation
                    )&#x200E;
                Select this option if you&#39;re the only person who uses this computer. Your server will allow a longer period of inactivity before signing you out.
                Warning:  By selecting this option, you confirm that this computer complies with your organization&#39;s security policy.
                    Use the light version of Outlook Web App
                The light version of Outlook Web App includes fewer features. Use it if you&#39;re on a slow connection or using a computer with unusually strict browser security settings. We also support the full Outlook Web App experience on some browsers on Windows, Mac, and Linux computers. To check out all the supported browsers and operating systems, click here.
                        sign in
            Outlook Web App 
            Please enable cookies for this Web site.Cookies are currently disabled by your browser. Outlook Web App requires that cookies be enabled. For information about how to enable cookies, see the Help for your Web browser.
                    retry
                Don't forget to Log Off
                        When you're finished with your KU OWA session, be sure to click on
                        "Log Off" to protect your email account privacy.
                    To protect your account from unauthorized access, Outlook Web Access automatically closes
                        its connection to your mailbox after a period of inactivity. If your session ends,
                        refresh your browser, and then log on again.
                            Assistance
                            Email services and configuration instructions at KU
                            OWA help
                            Check the technology service updates and alerts
                            IT Customer Service Center  864-8080, itcsc@ku.edu
                            Useful Links
                                Get your copy of Microsoft
                                    Office (including Outlook) through the KU Microsoft Campus Agreement
                                Setup email encryption
                                    for your KU email account
                                Manage your online services (including your email aliases)
                                Change your password
                            Contact The University of Kansas
                            1450 Jayhawk Blvd.
                            Lawrence, KS 66045
                            785-864-2700
                    Twitter Icon
                    Google Plus Icon
                    Facebook
                        Icon
                    Linked in
                        Icon
                    Instagram Icon
                    YouTube Icon
                    All social media at KU &raquo;
                        Academics
                        Admissions
                        Alumni
                        Athletics
                        Campuses
                        Contacts
                        Giving
                        Jobs
                        Maps
                        The University of Kansas prohibits
                        discrimination on the basis of race, color, ethnicity, religion, sex, national origin, age,
                        ancestry, disability, status as a veteran, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status,
                        retaliation, gender identity, gender expression and genetic information in the University&#8217;s
                        programs and activities. The following person has been designated to handle inquiries regarding
                        the non-discrimination policies and is the University&#8217;s Title IX Coordinator: the
                        Executive Director of the Office of Institutional Opportunity and Access, IOA@ku.edu, 1246 W. Campus Road, Room 153A,
                        Lawrence, KS, 66045, (785)864-6414, 711 TTY.

