      Page not found | Parking
            People Search
        Degree Search
Browse by school    
        Course Search
Search class sections | Online courses
        Library Search
Libraries | Hours &amp; locations | Ask
    Advising | Catalog | Tutors
    Writing Center | Math help room
    Finals Schedule | GPA Calculator
          CMS Login: KU Users | Non-KU Users
    KU Home
    About KU
    Admissions
    Athletics
    Alumni
    Campuses
    Social Media
    Endowment
    KU Today
                                Parking
                                        Parking &amp; Transit Office
      Search form
  Search 
            Home  
      The requested page "/motorcycle.shtml" could not be found.    
      Manage My Account 
Report Disabled Vehicle!
Need A Medical/ADA Permit? »
Parking Map »
(PDF)
KU on Wheels »
SafeBus/SafeRide »
              Getting To Class
      From lot 125 to Wescoe:
              Tweets By KUParking
      Tweets by @parkingku 
            Fast Facts
                                    Pay Online
                                            You must have a permit or pay by the hour to park in a KU lot
                                            Parking is self-funded, receiving no state funding or tuition money
                                            15,000 parking spaces on campus
                                            Main campus closed to drive-through traffic 7:45 a.m.–5 p.m.
                                            Anyone with a valid KU Card can ride buses free
                                            Parking meters using Parkmobile now accept credit cards 
                                            Follow parking on Twitter: @parkingKU
                                            Visitors should park in parking garages or at meters
                                            Red, Blue, and Gold zones are ticketed Monday through Friday year-round
                                            Using a yellow annual parking permit costs $1.28 per day 
                                            To use ADA parking, you must register your placard with Parking & Transit and buy a parking permit
                                            In residence hall zones, we patrol continuously and issue tickets day and night starting at 7 a.m. Monday and ending at 5 p.m. Friday when classes are in session
                                            You don’t need to own a car to have a car – rent 1 of 4 cars by the hour with Hertz on Demand
                                            48 hours before closing lots for events, we'll post a real estate sign with the date and time at the entrance 
                                            Walking time from lot 57 (Stadium) to Wescoe: 6.5 minutes
Walking time from lot 90 (Recreation Center) to Wescoe: 8.5 minutes
                                            Going to Watkins Health Center? Park at the meters, pay for 1 hour 
                Pay parking tickets and purchase permits in the Parking Payment Portal.
KU users will need to login to Kyou portal to access your parking account.
Non-KU users are not required to create an account.
      Contact Parking
                    kupark@ku.edu
                            785-864-PARK [7275]
                            Routes 10, 11 & 41
        Allen Fieldhouse Garage 
1501 Irving Hill Road
Lawrence, KS 66045    
      Office Hours
7:30 a.m. - 5 p.m., Monday - Thursday
7:30 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. Friday
Closed Saturday - Sunday, and Holidays
&nbsp;
    Academics
    Admissions
    Alumni
    Athletics
    Campuses
    Giving
    Jobs
      Contact KU
Lawrence, KS | Maps    
    The University of Kansas prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, ethnicity, religion, sex, national origin, age, ancestry, disability, status as a veteran, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, gender identity, gender expression, and genetic information in the university’s programs and activities. Retaliation is also prohibited by university policy. The following persons have been designated to handle inquiries regarding the nondiscrimination policies and are the Title IX coordinators for their respective campuses: Executive Director of the Office of Institutional Opportunity & Access, IOA@ku.edu, 1246 West Campus Road, Room 153A, Lawrence, KS 66045, 785-864-6414, 711 TTY (for the Lawrence, Edwards, Parsons, Yoder, and Topeka campuses); Director, Equal Opportunity Office, Mail Stop 7004, 4330 Shawnee Mission Parkway, Fairway, KS 66205, 913-588-8011, 711 TTY (for the Wichita, Salina, and Kansas City, Kansas, medical center campuses).

