      Pharmacy | Watkins Health Services
            People Search
        Degree Search
Browse by school    
        Course Search
Search class sections | Online courses
        Library Search
Libraries | Hours &amp; locations | Ask
    Advising | Catalog | Tutors
    Writing Center | Math help room
    Finals Schedule | GPA Calculator
          CMS Login: KU Users | Non-KU Users
    KU Home
    About KU
    Admissions
    Athletics
    Alumni
    Campuses
    Social Media
    Endowment
    KU Today
                                Watkins Health Services
      Search form
  Search 
      Home
About
PeopleAdministration
CARE Coordinator
HERO
Nursing
Providers
Other StaffMarketing
Physical Therapy
Policy Compliance
Forms
Resources
Student Involvement
FAQ Library
      MenuHome
About
PeopleAdministration
CARE Coordinator
HERO
Nursing
Providers
Other StaffMarketing
Physical Therapy
Policy Compliance
Forms
Resources
Student Involvement
FAQ Library
Search
      Search form
  Search 
            HomeServicesPharmacy  
Our Pharmacists and Pharmacy Interns provide counseling about your prescription medications, any potential side effects, and drug interactions. We can also help you choose the best over-the-counter (OTC) medication for your needs.
 
 
Filling Prescriptions
The Pharmacy can fill any valid prescription written by a healthcare provider licensed to practice in the United States.
Eligibility 
KU Students
	KU Faculty and Staff
	KU Retirees
	Student Spouses/Domestic Partners. The student must accompany the spouse/domestic partner on the initial visit and fill out a Spouse/Domestic Partner Guarantor (PDF) form.
	Participants of KU Hosted Camps
How to Fill a Prescription
Bring your prescription to the Pharmacy. Or, your provider may call in the prescription at 785-864-9512 or 785-864-9531, fax it to 785-864-9516, or send it electronically.
	Bring your insurance card if you have one.
	Pick up your prescription within six days after your order.
How to Refill a Prescription 
To refill a prescription that was last filled at our Pharmacy and that has valid refills remaining, it is helpful to know the name of your medication or the prescription number (see package label).
Call in your refill or
	Come to the Pharmacy to request a refill or
	Use secure messaging through the myWHS patient portal
If your prescription has run out of refills, we will contact your healthcare provider for instructions. You may need to schedule an appointment with a healthcare provider to renew the prescription. Students may schedule an appointment with a provider at Watkins Health Services for convenience.
Prescription refills may require one business day advance notice. Please note that Watkins Health Center hours may change due to holidays, semester breaks and the summer school session. This may affect the amount of time it takes to refill your prescription, so please plan refills accordingly.
Transferring Prescriptions to Watkins Pharmacy
Your pharmaceuticals from hometown providers can be transferred to our pharmacy. There are three options for you to accomplish this:
Call our Pharmacy at 785-864-9531 and be prepared to provide the Name and Strength of the medication, the prescription number and the contact information for the other pharmacy.
	Or, complete the Pharmacy Prescription Transfer Form and bring it or fax it to our pharmacy.
	Or, you may come by the Pharmacy with the medication in its bottle or package and speak with one of our staff members.
Our staff will then call your hometown pharmacy to transfer your current prescriptions to us. Transferred prescriptions are usually ready in about one business day.
Over-the-Counter (OTC) Medication
The Pharmacy has a selection of many over-the-counter medications. A special order can also be placed for items not in stock. Condoms are available three for fifty cents plus tax.
OTC Categories
Cough, Cold and Flu
	Allergies and Sinus
	Eye, Ear, Nose, Throat, and Mouth Care
	Coffee, Food, and Drink
	First Aid
	Hair and Skin Care
	Foot Care
	Pain Relief and Management
	Condoms 3/50¢
	Stomach Relief
	Vitamins and Supplements
	Emergency Contraception
Payment
Cash, personal checks, Beak 'Em Bucks, and all major credit cards are accepted. Currently enrolled students may choose to have prescriptions and OTC medications billed to their health center account. Most insurance plans are accepted.
Insurance and Pharmacy Benefit Managers (PBMs)
The pharmacy is contracted with many PBMs such as Medco, Express Scripts, Caremark, Cigna, Aetna, Humana and many others. Please provide your prescription plan ID card to a pharmacist staff member. The pharmacist may need to reference the BIN, Group and/or PCN numbers from your card to process your claim accurately.
      Each KU student has a secure portal for communicating with us:
 
Make Appointments
	Request Rx Refills
	View Balances
	Check Messages
	View Lab Results
	and more!
            Watkins Daily Hours
        Mon - Fri: 8:00 am-6:00 pmSat: 12:00 pm-4:00 pm    
            Walk-In Hours
        Mon - Fri: 8:00 am-5:00 pmSat: 12:00 pm-3:00 pm    
      Contact WHS
 
1200 Schwegler Dr. Lawrence" });google.maps.event.addListener(marker, "click", function(){infowindow.open(map,marker);});}google.maps.event.addDomListener(window, 'load', init_map);
//-->
 
              Events
      Your browser must support JavaScript to view this content. 
Please enable JavaScript in your browser settings then try again.    
      Tweets by @Beak_Healthy 
              Student Health 101
      Check out the latest issue
            Why KU
                                    Apply &raquo;
                                            One of 34 U.S. public institutions in the prestigious Association of American Universities
                                            26 prestigious Rhodes Scholars &mdash; more than all other Kansas colleges combined
                                            Nearly $290 million in financial aid annually
                                            44 nationally ranked graduate programs.
&mdash;U.S. News &amp; World Report
                                            Top 50 nationwide for size of library collection.
&mdash;ALA
                                            23rd nationwide for service to veterans
&mdash;"Best for Vets," Military Times
        Give to KU &raquo;
    KU Today
      Contact Watkins Health Services
                    health@ku.edu
                            785-864-9500
                            Routes 27, 38, 42
        1200 Schwegler Drive
Lawrence, KS 66045    
    Academics
    Admissions
    Alumni
    Athletics
    Campuses
    Giving
    Jobs
      Contact KU
Lawrence, KS | Maps    
    The University of Kansas prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, ethnicity, religion, sex, national origin, age, ancestry, disability, status as a veteran, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, gender identity, gender expression, and genetic information in the university’s programs and activities. Retaliation is also prohibited by university policy. The following persons have been designated to handle inquiries regarding the nondiscrimination policies and are the Title IX coordinators for their respective campuses: Executive Director of the Office of Institutional Opportunity & Access, IOA@ku.edu, 1246 West Campus Road, Room 153A, Lawrence, KS 66045, 785-864-6414, 711 TTY (for the Lawrence, Edwards, Parsons, Yoder, and Topeka campuses); Director, Equal Opportunity Office, Mail Stop 7004, 4330 Shawnee Mission Parkway, Fairway, KS 66205, 913-588-8011, 711 TTY (for the Wichita, Salina, and Kansas City, Kansas, medical center campuses).

