Redwood National and State Parks - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
			Redwood National and State Parks
									From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
					Jump to:					navigation, 					search
Redwood National and State Parks
IUCN category II (national park)
Fog in the forest
Location of Redwood National and State Parks
Location
Humboldt County &amp; Del Norte County, California, US
Nearestcity
Crescent City
Coordinates
41°18′N 124°00′W﻿ / ﻿41.3°N 124°W﻿ / 41.3; -124Coordinates: 41°18′N 124°00′W﻿ / ﻿41.3°N 124°W﻿ / 41.3; -124
Area
112,618 acres (45,575ha)[1]
Established
January 1, 1968
Visitors
380,167 (in2011)[2]
Governingbody
Co-managed by National Park Service and California Department of Parks and Recreation
UNESCO World Heritage Site
Official name
Redwood National Park
Type
Natural
Criteria
vii, ix
Designated
1980 (4th session)
Referenceno.
134
State Party
United States
Region
Europe and North America
The Redwood National and State Parks (RNSP) are old-growth temperate rainforests located in the United States, along the coast of northern California. Comprising Redwood National Park (established 1968) and California's Del Norte Coast, Jedediah Smith, and Prairie Creek Redwoods State Parks (dating from the 1920s), the combined RNSP contain 133,000 acres (540km2).[3] Located entirely within Del Norte and Humboldt Counties, the four parks, together, protect 45% of all remaining coast redwood (Sequoia sempervirens) old-growth forests, totaling at least 38,982 acres (157.75km2). These trees are the tallest and one of the most massive tree species on Earth. In addition to the redwood forests, the parks preserve other indigenous flora, fauna, grassland prairie, cultural resources, portions of rivers and other streams, and 37 miles (60km) of pristine coastline.
In 1850, old-growth redwood forest covered more than 2,000,000 acres (8,100km2) of the California coast. The northern portion of that area, originally inhabited by Native Americans, attracted many lumbermen and others turned gold miners when a minor gold rush brought them to the region. Failing in efforts to strike it rich in gold, these men turned toward harvesting the giant trees[4] for booming development in San Francisco and other places on the West Coast. After many decades of unrestricted clear-cut logging, serious efforts toward conservation began. By the 1920s the work of the Save-the-Redwoods League, founded in 1918 to preserve remaining old-growth redwoods, resulted in the establishment of Prairie Creek, Del Norte Coast, and Jedediah Smith Redwoods State Parks among others. Redwood National Park was created in 1968, by which time nearly 90% of the original redwood trees had been logged. The National Park Service (NPS) and the California Department of Parks and Recreation (CDPR) administratively combined Redwood National Park with the three abutting Redwood State Parks in 1994 for the purpose of cooperative forest management and stabilization of forests and watersheds as a single unit.[5]
The ecosystem of the RNSP preserves a number of threatened animal species such as the tidewater goby, Chinook salmon, northern spotted owl, and Steller's sea lion.[6] In recognition of the rare ecosystem and cultural history found in the parks, the United Nations designated them a World Heritage Site on September 5, 1980 and an International Biosphere Reserve on June 30, 1983.[7]
Contents
1 History
2 Park management
3 Natural resources
3.1 Flora
3.2 Fauna
3.3 Invasive species
3.4 Geology
3.5 Climate
3.6 Fire management
4 Recreation
5 In films
6 See also
7 Notes
8 References
9 External links
History[edit]
Reconstruction of a Yurok Native American plankhouse constructed of redwood boards
Modern day Native groups such as the Yurok, Tolowa, Karok, Chilula, and Wiyot all have historical ties to the region, and some Native American groups still live in the park area today. Archaeological study shows they arrived in the area as far back as 3,000 years ago. An 1852 census determined that the Yurok were the most numerous, with 55 villages and an estimated population of 2,500.[8] They used the abundant redwood, which with its linear grain was easily split into planks, as a building material for boats, houses, and small villages.[9] For buildings, the planks would be erected side by side in a narrow trench, with the upper portions bound with leather strapping and held by notches cut into the supporting roof beams. Redwood boards were used to form a shallow sloping roof.[10]
Previous to Jedediah Smith in 1828, no other explorer of European descent is known to have thoroughly investigated the inland region away from the immediate coast. The discovery of gold along the Trinity River in 1850 led to a minor secondary rush in California. This brought miners into the area and many stayed on at the coast after failing to strike it rich. This quickly led to conflicts wherein native peoples were placed under great strain, if not forcibly removed or massacred.[11] By 1895, only one third of the Yurok in one group of villages remained; by 1919, virtually all members of the Chilula tribe had either died or been assimilated into other tribes.[12] The miners logged redwoods for building; when this minor gold rush ended, some of them turned again to logging, cutting down the giant redwood trees. Initially, over 2,000,000 acres (8,100km2) of the California and southwestern coast of Oregon were old-growth redwood forest, but by 1910, extensive logging led conservationists and concerned citizens to begin seeking ways to preserve the remaining trees, which they saw being logged at an alarming rate.[13] In 1911, U.S. Representative John E. Raker, of California, became the first politician to introduce legislation for the creation of a redwood national park. However, no further action was taken by Congress at this time.
The coast redwood is the tallest tree species on Earth.
Preservation of the redwood stands in California is considered one of the most substantial conservation contributions of the Boone and Crockett Club. The Save-the-Redwoods League was founded in 1918 by Boone and Crockett Club members Madison Grant, John C. Merriam, Henry Fairfield Osborn, and future member, Frederick Russell Burnham. The initial purchases of land were made by Club member Stephen Mather and Mr. William Kent. In 1921, Boone and Crockett Club member Dr. John C. Phillips donated $32,000 to purchase land and create the Raynal Bolling Memorial Grove in the Humboldt Redwoods State Park.[14] This was timely as U.S. Route 101, which would soon provide nearly unfettered access to the trees, was under construction. Using matching funds provided initially by the County of Humboldt and later by the State of California, the Save-the-Redwoods League managed to protect areas of concentrated or multiple redwood groves and a few entire forests in the 1920s. As California created a state park system, beginning in 1927, three of the preserved redwood areas became Prairie Creek Redwoods, Del Norte Coast Redwoods, and Jedediah Smith Redwoods State Parks. A fourth became Humboldt Redwoods State Park, by far the largest of the individual Redwood State Parks, but not in the Redwood National and State Park system. Because of the high demand for lumber during World War II and the construction boom that followed in the 1950s, the creation of a national park was delayed. Efforts by the Save-the-Redwoods League, the Sierra Club, and the National Geographic Society to create a national park began in the early 1960s.[15] After intense lobbying of Congress, the bill creating Redwood National Park was signed by President Lyndon Johnson on October 2, 1968. The Save-the-Redwoods League and other entities purchased over 100,000 acres (400km2), which were added to existing state parks. In 1978, 48,000 acres (190km2) were added to Redwood National Park in a major expansion.[15] However, only a fifth of that land was old-growth forest, the rest having been logged. This expansion protected the watershed along Redwood Creek from being adversely affected by logging operations outside the park. The federal and state parks were administratively combined in 1994.[16]
The United Nations designated Redwood National and State Parks a World Heritage Site on September 5, 1980. The evaluation committee noted 50 prehistoric archaeological sites, spanning 4,500years. It also cited ongoing research in the park by Humboldt State University researchers, among others.[17] The park is part of a much larger region designated the California Coast Ranges International Biosphere Reserve on June 30, 1983.[18] The California Coast Ranges biosphere is overseen by the University of California Natural Reserve System.
Park management[edit]
Map illustrates Redwood National and State Parks features and boundaries.
Redwood National Park headquarters is located in Crescent City, California, with a service office located in Arcata and an operations center located in Orick, California.
Lack of money has precluded major improvements, however, and timber companies have replanted much of the logged area with non-native tree species. Coastline areas, including dunes and coastal prairie, have been invaded by exotic species, partly due to the suppression of forest fires until the 1980s. A fire management plan now allows controlled burning as one method to return the parkland to its original state. Since the redwoods were logged on the basis of accessibility, with inaccessible areas being cut last, large old-growth forest sections were isolated from one another, sometimes by many miles. In these cases it will be decades more before mature forest can return, regardless of the amount of money used to rehabilitate the ecosystem.[19]
The park has transformed a few logging roads into scenic public drives. These do not meet current safety standards, but funding to improve them is not available at present. Park structures such as visitor centers and employee housing also need updating to meet increasing demands. Park employees perform air and water quality surveys, monitor endangered and threatened species, and work closely with the California Coastal National Monument, which is managed by the U.S. Bureau of Land Management.[20] In 2005, the parks were authorized to expand another 25,000 acres (100km2) to include the Mill Creek watershed.[21]
Natural resources[edit]
The Redwood National and State Parks form one of the most significant protected areas of the Northern California coastal forests ecoregion.
Flora[edit]
It is estimated that old-growth redwood forest once covered close to 2,000,000 acres (8,100km2) of coastal northern California.[22] 96% of all old-growth redwoods have been logged, and almost half (45%) of the redwoods remaining are found in Redwood National and State Parks. The parks protect 38,982 acres (157.75km2) of old-growth forest almost equally divided between federal 19,640 acres (79.5km2) and state 19,342 acres (78.27km2) management.[21] Redwoods have existed along the coast of northern California for at least 20million years and are related to tree species that existed 160million years ago.[23]
The native range of coast redwood is from the northern California coast north to the southern Oregon Coast. The tree is closely related to the giant sequoia of central California, and more distantly to the dawn redwood which is indigenous to the Sichuan–Hubei region of China. Coast redwoods are the tallest trees on Earth; as of September 2006, the tallest tree in the park was Hyperion at 379.1 feet (115.5m), followed by Helios and Icarus which were 376.3 feet (114.7m) and 371.2 feet (113.1m) respectively.[24]
Sequoia sempervirens
Before September 2006, the tallest living specimen known was the Stratosphere Giant, outside the park in Humboldt Redwoods State Park, which was 370 feet (110m) in 2004. For many years, one specimen simply named Tall Tree in Prairie Creek Redwoods State Park and within the RNSP was measured at 367.8 feet (112.1m), but the top 10 feet (3.0m) of the tree was reported to have died in the 1990s.[25] One tree that fell in 1991 was reported to be 372.04 feet (113.40m). Only the giant sequoia has more mass. The largest redwood by volume is the 42,500cubic foot (1,205m³) Lost Monarch, located in Jedediah Smith Redwoods State Park. Mature Coast redwoods live an average of 500–700years and a few are documented to be 2,000years old, making them some of the longest-living organisms on earth.[21][26] They are highly resistant to disease, due to a thick protective bark and high tannin content. Redwoods prefer sheltered slopes, slightly inland and near water sources such as rivers and streams.
Redwood trees develop enormous limbs that accumulate deep organic soils and can support tree-sized trunks growing on them. This typically occurs above 150 feet (46m). Scientists have recently discovered that plants which normally grow on the forest floor also grow in these soils, well above ground. The soil mats provide homes to invertebrates, mollusks, earthworms, and salamanders. During drought seasons, some treetops die back, but the trees do not die outright. Instead, redwoods have developed mechanisms to regrow new trunks from other limbs. These secondary trunks, called reiterations, also develop root systems in the accumulated soils at their bases. This helps transport water to the highest reaches of the trees. Coastal fog also provides up to one-third of their annual water needs.[27]
Another large tree commonly found in the forest is the coast Douglas-fir, which has been measured at heights of over 300 feet (91m). Sitka spruce are plentiful along the coast and are better adapted to salty air than other species. The evergreen hardwood tanoak produces a nut similar to the acorns produced by the related genus Quercus (oak). Both tanoaks and oaks are members of the beech family. Trees such as the Pacific madrone, bigleaf maple, California laurel, and red alder are also widespread throughout the parks.[28]
Huckleberry, blackberry, and salmonberry are part of the forest understory and provide food for many animal species. The California rhododendron and azalea are flowering shrubs common in the park, especially in old-growth forest.[28] Plants such as the sword fern are prolific, particularly near ample water sources. In Prairie Creek Redwoods State Park, Fern Canyon is a well-known ravine 30 to 50 feet (9.1 to 15.2m) deep, with walls completely covered in ferns.
Fauna[edit]
Northern spotted owl (Strix occidentalis caurina) is a threatened species known to exist in the parks.
The ecosystems of RNSP preserve a number of rare animal species. Numerous ecosystems exist, with seacoast, river, prairie, and densely forested zones all within the park. The tidewater goby is a federally listed endangered species that live near the Pacific coastline. The bald eagle, which usually nests near a water source, is listed as a state of California endangered species. The Chinook salmon, northern spotted owl, and Steller's sea lion are a few of the other animal species that are threatened.[6][29]
Over 40 species of mammals have been documented, including the black bear, mountain lion, bobcat, beaver, river otter, black-tailed deer, elk, and coyote. Along the coastline, California sea lions, Steller sea lions and harbor seals live near the shore and on seastacks, rocky outcroppings forming small islands just off the coast. Dolphins and Pacific gray whales are occasionally seen offshore. Roosevelt elk are the most readily observed of the large mammals in the park. Successful herds, brought back from the verge of extinction in the region, are now a common site in park areas south of the Klamath River. Many smaller mammals live in the high forest canopy. Different species of bats, such as the big brown bat, and other smaller mammals including the red squirrel and northern flying squirrel spend most of their lives well above the forest floor.[27]
Brown pelicans and double-crested cormorants are mainly found on cliffs along the coast and on seastacks, while sandpipers and gulls inhabit the seacoast and inland areas. Inland, freshwater-dependent birds such as the common merganser, osprey, red-shouldered hawk, great blue heron, and Steller's jay are a few of the bird species that have been documented. At least 400 bird species have been documented in the forestlands.[30]
Reptiles and amphibians can also be found in the parks, with the northwestern ringneck snake, northern red-legged frog, Pacific giant salamander, and the rough-skinned newt most commonly seen.[29]
Invasive species[edit]
Currently, there are over 200 exotic species known to live in Redwood National and State Parks. Of these thirty have been identified as invasive species, ten of these are considered threats to local species and ecosystems. Exotic species currently account for about a quarter of the total flora in the parks. Only about one percent of plant growth in old-growth areas are of exotic species, while areas such as the Bald Hills prairies have a relative cover of fifty to seventy-five percent exotic.[31] The type of foreign vegetation also varies, with plants such as the English Ivy (Hedera helix), Spotted Knapweed (Centaurea maculosa), and the Poison Hemlock (Conium maculatum). The spotted knapweed and poison hemlock are both under consideration for addition to a high priority watch list maintained by the park system.[32]
Geology[edit]
Coastline area
The northern coastal region of California, which includes RNSP and the adjacent offshore area, is the most seismically active in the U.S.[33] Frequent minor earthquakes in the park and offshore under the Pacific Ocean have resulted in shifting river channels, landslides, and erosion of seaside cliffs. The North American, Pacific, and Gorda Plates are tectonic plates that all meet at the Mendocino Triple Junction, only 100 miles (160km) southwest of the parks. During the 1990s, more than nine magnitude6.0 earthquakes occurred along this fault zone, and there is always potential for a major earthquake.[34] The park ensures that visitors are aware of the potential for a major earthquake through the use of pamphlets and information posted throughout the parks. The threat of a tsunami is of particular concern, and visitors to the seacoast are told to seek higher ground immediately after any significant earthquake.[33]
Both coastline and the Coast Ranges can be found within park boundaries. The majority of the rocks in the parks are part of the Franciscan Assemblage, uplifted from the ocean floor millions of years ago. These sedimentary rocks are primarily sandstone, siltstone, and shale, with lesser amounts of metamorphic rocks such as chert and greenstone. For the most part, these rocks are easily eroded, and can be viewed along the seacoast and where rivers and streams have cut small gorges. Formed during the Cretaceous age, they are highly deformed from uplift and folding processes. In some areas, river systems have created fluvial deposits of sandstone, mudstone, and conglomerate, which are transported into the park from upstream. Redwood Creek follows the Grogan Fault; along the west bank of the creek, schist and other metamorphic rocks can be found, while sedimentary rocks of the Franciscan Assemblage are located on the east bank.[17]
Climate[edit]
Climate data for Redwood National and State Parks (Jedediah Smith Redwoods State Park; Del Norte County)
Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year
Record high °F (°C)
75
(24)
80
(27)
81
(27)
86
(30)
91
(33)
98
(37)
89
(32)
93
(34)
95
(35)
90
(32)
78
(26)
72
(22)
98
(37)
Average high °F (°C)
53.4
(11.9)
55.0
(12.8)
56.0
(13.3)
56.9
(13.8)
60.7
(15.9)
63.4
(17.4)
65.0
(18.3)
65.1
(18.4)
65.2
(18.4)
62.6
(17)
56.6
(13.7)
52.7
(11.5)
59.4
(15.2)
Average low °F (°C)
35.8
(2.1)
36.5
(2.5)
38.1
(3.4)
39.9
(4.4)
44.0
(6.7)
47.6
(8.7)
50.4
(10.2)
50.8
(10.4)
47.4
(8.6)
42.9
(6.1)
38.8
(3.8)
35.5
(1.9)
42.3
(5.7)
Record low °F (°C)
18
(−8)
19
(−7)
24
(−4)
27
(−3)
24
(−4)
33
(1)
34
(1)
36
(2)
24
(−4)
28
(−2)
22
(−6)
16
(−9)
16
(−9)
Average precipitation inches (mm)
12.18
(309.4)
10.65
(270.5)
10.31
(261.9)
6.27
(159.3)
3.94
(100.1)
2.00
(50.8)
0.37
(9.4)
0.53
(13.5)
1.21
(30.7)
5.00
(127)
11.42
(290.1)
15.72
(399.3)
79.6
(2,021.8)
Average snowfall inches (cm)
0.4
(1)
0.4
(1)
0.1
(0.3)
0.0
(0)
0.0
(0)
0.0
(0)
0.0
(0)
0.0
(0)
0.0
(0)
0.0
(0)
0.0
(0)
0.1
(0.3)
1.1
(2.8)
Average precipitation days (≥ 0.01 in)
17.6
15.7
17.1
14.0
9.0
5.3
1.9
2.0
3.8
7.7
16.3
17.4
127.8
Source #1: NOAA (normals, 1981–2010)[35]
Source #2: Western Regional Climate Center (records and snowfall 1948–2006)[36]
The Redwood National and State Parks have an oceanic temperate rainforest climate, with cool-summer Mediterranean characteristics. Weather in RNSP is greatly influenced by the Pacific Ocean. Coastal temperatures generally range between 40 and 60degrees Fahrenheit (4–15°C) all year round, while further from the coast summers are hotter and drier, and winters are colder.[37] Redwoods mostly grow a mile or two (1.5–3km) from the coast, and never more than 50 miles (80km) from it. In this temperate but humid coastal zone, the trees receive moisture from both heavy winter rains and persistent summer fog. The presence and consistency of the summer fog is actually more important to overall health of the trees than heavy precipitation. This fact is born out in annual precipitation totals, which range between 25 and 122 inches (64 and 310cm) annually, with healthy redwood forests throughout the areas of less precipitation because excessive needs for water are mitigated by the ever-present summer fog and the cooler temperatures it ensures. Snow is uncommon even on peaks above 1,500 feet (460m), further exemplifying the mild, temperate nature of this northern latitude;[38] however, light snow mixed with rain is common during the winter months.
Fire management[edit]
Fog is persistent during the summer, as seen here, and the majority of fires are during the fall.
Wildfires are a natural part of most terrestrial ecosystems. In many ways nature has adapted to fire, and the absence of fire can often be disadvantageous.[39] Wildfire eliminates dead and decayed plant and tree matter, enriching the soil and ensuring that healthier trees have less competition for limited nutrients. Prescribed fire is currently part of the fire management plan and helps to eliminate exotic species of plants and allows a more fertile and natural ecosystem. Fire is also used to protect prairie grasslands and to keep out forest encroachment, ensuring sufficient rangeland for elk and deer. The oak forest regions also benefit from controlled burns, as Douglas fir would otherwise eventually take over and decrease biodiversity. The use of fire in old-growth redwood zones reduces dead and decaying material, and lessens the mortality of larger redwoods by eliminating competing vegetation. In the park, a fire management plan monitors all fires, weather patterns and the fuel load (dead and decaying plant material). This fuel load is removed from areas near structures and where fire poses high risk to the public, and controlled burns are used elsewhere.[40] The National Interagency Fire Center provides additional firefighters and equipment in the event of a large fire.
Recreation[edit]
The DeMartin Redwood Youth Hostel, a low-amenities shared lodging facility (near Klamath), has now closed. There are no hotels or motels within the parks boundaries. However, nearby towns such as Klamath, Requa, and Orick provide small hotels and inns, with extensive lodging options available in the regional trading centers of Crescent City on the northern end of the park and Arcata and Eureka located to the south. The park is about 260 miles (420km) north of San Francisco, and 300 miles (480km) south of Portland, Oregon; U.S. Route 101 passes through it from north to south. The Smith River National Recreation Area, part of the Six Rivers National Forest, is adjacent to the north end of RNSP.
While the state parks have front country campsites that can be driven to, the federal sections of the park do not, and hiking is the only way to reach back country campsites. These are at Mill Creek campground in Del Norte Coast Redwoods State Park and Jedediah Smith campground in Jedediah Smith Redwoods State Park, which together have 251 campsites; the Elk Prairie campground in Prairie Creek Redwoods State Park which has 75; and the Gold Bluffs Beach campground which has 25 campsites. Other nearby state parks have additional front country camping.[41]
Scene along a hiking trail in Fern Canyon
Back country camping is by permit only and is only allowed in designated sites, except on gravel bars along Redwood Creek. Access to the back country is highly regulated to prevent overuse while permitting as many groups as possible to explore the forest. Camping in the back country is therefore limited to five consecutive nights, and 15 nights in any one year. Proper food storage to minimize encounters with bears is strongly enforced, and hikers and backpackers are required to take out any trash they generate.[42]
Almost 200 miles (320km) of hiking trails exist in the parks, but during the rainy season some temporary footbridges are removed, as they would be destroyed by high streams. Throughout the year, trails are often wet and hikers need to be well prepared for rainy weather and consult information centers for updates on trail conditions.[42]
Horseback riding and mountain biking are popular but are only allowed on certain trails. Kayaking is popular along the seacoast and in the various rivers and streams. Kayakers and canoeists frequently travel the Smith River, which is the longest undammed river remaining in California. Fishing for salmon and steelhead, a highly prized anadromous form of rainbow trout over 16 inches (41cm), is best in the Smith and Klamath rivers. A California sport fishing license is required to fish any of the rivers and streams.[43] Hunting is not permitted anywhere in the parks, but is allowed in nearby National Forests.
The park has three visitor centers, where guided nature walks and general information are available, along with two additional information points.[44] Each campground offers campfire talks during the summer months as well as guided tours.[41] The parks have many picnic areas, which are all easily accessed by vehicle.
In films[edit]
The park has served as a filming location for numerous films. Scenes set on the forest moon Endor in Star Wars Episode VI: Return of the Jedi were filmed in the Tall Trees Redwood Grove in the northern part of Humboldt County, though the majority of filming was in private and public forests near the town of Smith River, California. Scenes for The Lost World: Jurassic Park as well as the movie Outbreak were filmed at the nearby Prairie Creek Redwoods State Park and at Patrick's Point State Park.[45]
The park was also used to represent Jurassic forests of Colorado in Walking with Dinosaurs in "Time of the Titans" and in the 2007 IMAX film Dinosaurs Alive!, where they were used to represent Triassic forests of New Mexico, which was based on Petrified wood in Petrified Forest National Park in Arizona.
The park was also shown in the 2011 film Rise of the Planet of the Apes and its 2014 sequel Dawn of the Planet of the Apes as well.
See also[edit]
The following three California State Parks are the only State Parks co-managed within the RNSP system:
Del Norte Coast Redwoods State Park
Jedediah Smith Redwoods State Park
Prairie Creek Redwoods State Park
Notes[edit]
^ "Listing of acreage as of December 31, 2011". Land Resource Division, National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-07.
^ "NPS Annual Recreation Visits Report". National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-07.
^ "National or State Park?" (PDF). Redwood National and State Parks Visitor Guide. National Park Service. June 24, 2010. Retrieved 2010-06-24.
^ Coy, Owen Cochran (1982). The Humboldt Bay Region 1850-1875. Humboldt County Historical Society. p.51.
^ "Working Together". Redwood National and State Parks. National Park Service. Retrieved 2 April 2012.
^ a b "Threatened/Endangered Species". National Park Service. Retrieved 2008-11-07.
^ "U.S. World Heritage Sites". National Park Service. Archived from the original on 2008-10-13. Retrieved 2008-11-07.
^ "The Indians of the Redwoods". Redwood History Basic Data. National Park Service. January 15, 2004. Retrieved 2008-11-07.
^ Castillo, Edward (1998). "Short Overview of California Indian History". California Native American Heritage Commission. Retrieved 2008-11-07.
^ Nabokov, Peter; Robert Easton (October 25, 1990). Native American Architecture. U.S.: Oxford University Press. ISBN978-0-19-506665-4.
^ "American Indians". Area History. National Park Service. February 5, 2008. Retrieved 2008-11-07.
^ "The Chilula". The Indians of the Redwoods. National Park Service. January 15, 2004. Retrieved 2008-11-07.
^ "Logging". Area History. National Park Service. Retrieved 2008-11-07.
^ Sheldon, William G. (1955). A History of the Boone and Crockett Club. Boone and Crockett Club. pp.81–88.
^ a b Schrepfer, Susan R. (1983). The Fight to Save the Redwoods: A History of Environmental Reform, 1917-1978. Madison: The University of Wisconsin Press. pp.130–185. ISBN0-299-08850-2.
^ "Save the Redwoods Timeline". Save the Redwoods League. Retrieved 2008-11-07.
^ a b "Redwood National Park (includes Del Norte Coast Redwoods State Park, Jedediah Smith Redwoods State Park and Prairie Creek Redwoods State Park)" (PDF). Protected Areas and World Heritage. United Nations Environment Programme World Conservation Monitoring Centre. Retrieved 2009-08-14.
^ "California Coast Ranges". MAB Biosphere Reserves Directory. United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. Retrieved 2008-11-07.
^ "Strategic Plan for Redwood National and State Parks". National Park Service. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
^ "Fiscal Year 2004 Annual Performance Plan". Redwoods National Park. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
^ a b c "Frequently Asked Questions". National Park Service. August 17, 2008. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
^ "The Struggle For Redwood National Park". Redwood History Basic Data. National Park Service. January 15, 2004. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
^ "About The Trees". National Park Service. October 14, 2006. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
^ Glen, Martin (September 7, 2006). "Eureka! New tallest living thing discovered". San Francisco Chronicle.
^ Carle, Janet. "Tracking the Tallest Tree". California State Park Rangers Association. Archived from the original on 2008-05-19. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
^ "Comparison of Coast Redwood and Sierra Redwood". The Redwoods of Coast and Sierra. National Park Service. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
^ a b "Redwood National and State Parks Visitor Guide" (PDF). National Park Service. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
^ a b "Plants". Nature and Science. National Park Service. September 1, 2006. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
^ a b "Animals". National Park Service. April 17, 2008. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
^ Sakai, Howard. "Vertebrate Species that occur at Redwood National and State Parks". Species in Parks Flora and Fauna Databases. Information Center for the Environment/National Park Service. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
^ http://www.nps.gov/redw/naturescience/exotic-vegetation.htm
^ http://www.nps.gov/redw/naturescience/exotic-plant-species-list.htm
^ a b "Geology". Natural Resources. National Park Service. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
^ Oppenheimer, David (December 17, 2007). "Mendocino Triple Junction Offshore Northern California". A Policy for Rapid Mobilization of USGS OBS (RMOBS). U.S. Geological Survey. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
^ "CA Klamath". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved June 27, 2013.
^ "Klamath, California". Western Regional Climate Center. Retrieved June 27, 2013.
^ "Weather". National Park Service. September 1, 2006. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
^ "Park Geology". Geology Fieldnotes. National Park Service. January 1, 2005. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
^ "Prescribed Fire". Environmental Factors. National Park Service. September 30, 2008. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
^ "Fire Management Plan Environmental Assessment" (PDF). Rewood National and State Parks. May 2005. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
^ a b "Campgrounds". National Park Service. April 24, 2008. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
^ a b "Backcountry". National Park Service. September 1, 2006. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
^ "California Sport Fishing Regulations for Smith River" (PDF). National Park Service. May 2008. Retrieved 2009-08-14.
^ "Operating Hours &amp; Seasons". National Park Service. Retrieved 2008-11-16.
^ "From the Giant Redwoods to the Sea". Humboldt County Film Commission. Archived from the original on 2008-09-07. Retrieved 2008-11-15.
References[edit]
National Park Service. "Redwood National and State Parks". Retrieved in 2006.
Redwood National and State Parks. "Visitor Guide" (PDF). Retrieved in 2006.
Redwood: A Guide to Redwood National and State Parks, California. Interior Dept., National Park Service, Division of Publications. 1997. ISBN0-912627-61-1.
External links[edit]
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Redwood National Park.
Official Redwood National and State Parks website
Chronology: Establishment of the Redwood National Park by Willard E. Pratt. Forest History Society website.
Wikimedia Commons has media related to 
Redwood National and State Parks.
v
t
e
Protected areas of California
National Park System
National Parks
Channel Islands
Death Valley
Joshua Tree
Kings Canyon
Lassen Volcanic
Pinnacles
Redwood
Sequoia
Yosemite
National Preserves
Mojave
National Monuments
Berryessa Snow Mountain
Cabrillo
Cesar E. Chavez
Devils Postpile
Fort Ord
Lava Beds
Muir Woods
World War II Valor in the Pacific
National Seashores
Point Reyes
National Historical Parks
Rosie the Riveter/World War II Home Front
San Francisco Maritime
National Historic Sites
Eugene O'Neill
Fort Point
John Muir
Manzanar
National Memorials
Port Chicago Naval Magazine
National Recreation Areas
Golden Gate
Santa Monica Mountains
Whiskeytown
State Parks
State Parks
Ahjumawi Lava Springs
Andrew Molera
Angel Island
Annadel
Año Nuevo
Anza-Borrego Desert
Arthur B. Ripley Desert Woodland
Bidwell–Sacramento River
Big Basin Redwoods
Border Field
Bothe-Napa Valley
Burton Creek
Butano
Calaveras Big Trees
Castle Crags
Castle Rock
Caswell Memorial
China Camp
Chino Hills
Clear Lake
Crystal Cove
Cuyamaca Rancho
D. L. Bliss
Del Norte Coast Redwoods
Donner Memorial
Ed Z'berg Sugar Pine Point
Emerald Bay
The Forest of Nisene Marks
Fort Ord Dunes
Fremont Peak
Garrapata
Gaviota
Great Valley Grasslands
Grizzly Creek Redwoods
Grover Hot Springs
Hearst San Simeon
Hendy Woods
Henry Cowell Redwoods
Henry W. Coe
Humboldt Lagoons
Humboldt Redwoods
Jedediah Smith Redwoods
Julia Pfeiffer Burns
Leo Carrillo
Limekiln
MacKerricher
Malibu Creek
Manchester
McArthur–Burney Falls Memorial
McLaughlin Eastshore
Mendocino Headlands
Mendocino Woodlands
Montaña de Oro
Morro Bay
Mount Diablo
Mount San Jacinto
Mount Tamalpais
Navarro River Redwoods
Pacheco
Palomar Mountain
Patrick's Point
Pfeiffer Big Sur
Placerita Canyon
Plumas-Eureka
Point Mugu
Portola Redwoods
Prairie Creek Redwoods
Red Rock Canyon
Richardson Grove
Rio de Los Angeles
Robert Louis Stevenson
Russian Gulch
Saddleback Butte
Salt Point
Samuel P. Taylor
San Bruno Mountain
Sinkyone Wilderness
South Yuba River
Sugarloaf Ridge
Sutter Buttes
Tolowa Dunes
Tomales Bay
Topanga
Van Damme
Washoe Meadows
Wilder Ranch
State
Natural Reserves
Antelope Valley California Poppy
Armstrong Redwoods
Azalea
Caspar Headlands
John B. Dewitt
John Little
Jug Handle
Kruse Rhododendron
Los Osos Oaks
Mailliard Redwoods
Mono Lake Tufa
Montgomery Woods
Point Lobos
Smithe Redwoods
Torrey Pines
Tule Elk
State
Marine Reserves
Albany
Emeryville Crescent
State
Historic Parks
Anderson Marsh
Antelope Valley Indian Museum
Bale Grist Mill
Benicia Capitol
Bidwell Mansion
Bodie
California Citrus
California State Indian Museum
Chumash Painted Cave
Colonel Allensworth
Columbia
Cowell Ranch/John Marsh
El Presidio de Santa Barbara
Empire Mine
Folsom Powerhouse
Fort Humboldt
Fort Ross
Fort Tejon
Governor's Mansion
Hearst San Simeon
Indian Grinding Rock
Jack London
La Purísima Mission
Leland Stanford Mansion
Los Angeles
Los Encinos
Malakoff Diggins
Marconi Conference Center
Marshall Gold Discovery
Monterey
Old Sacramento
Old Town San Diego
Olompali
Petaluma Adobe
Pigeon Point Light Station
Pío Pico
Point Sur
Railtown 1897
San Juan Bautista
San Pasqual Battlefield
Santa Cruz Mission
Santa Susana Pass
Shasta
Sonoma
Sutter's Fort
Tomo-Kahni
Wassama Round House
Watts Towers of Simon Rodia
Weaverville Joss House
Will Rogers
William B. Ide Adobe
Woodland Opera House
State Beaches
Asilomar
Bean Hollow
Bolsa Chica
Cardiff
Carlsbad
Carmel River
Carpinteria
Caspar Headlands
Cayucos
Corona del Mar
Dockweiler
Doheny
El Capitán
Emma Wood
Gray Whale Cove
Greenwood
Half Moon Bay
Huntington
Leucadia
Lighthouse Field
Little River
Malibu Lagoon
Mandalay
Manresa
Marina
McGrath
Montara
Monterey
Moonlight
Morro Strand
Moss Landing
Natural Bridges
New Brighton
Pacifica
Pelican
Pescadero
Pismo
Point Dume
Point Sal
Pomponio
Refugio
Robert H. Meyer Memorial
Robert W. Crown Memorial
Salinas River
San Buenaventura
San Clemente
San Elijo
San Gregorio
San Onofre
Santa Monica
Schooner Gulch
Seacliff
Silver Strand
Sonoma Coast
South Carlsbad
Sunset
Thornton
Torrey Pines
Trinidad
Twin Lakes
Westport-Union Landing
Will Rogers
William Randolph Hearst Memorial
Zmudowski
State
Recreation Areas
Admiral William Standley
Auburn
Austin Creek
Benbow Lake
Benicia
Bethany Reservoir
Brannan Island
Candlestick Point
Castaic Lake
Colusa-Sacramento River
Folsom Lake
Franks Tract
George J. Hatfield
Harry A. Merlo
Kenneth Hahn
Kings Beach
Lake Del Valle
Lake Oroville
Lake Perris
Lake Valley
Martial Cottle Park
McConnell
Millerton Lake
Picacho
Providence Mountains
Salton Sea
San Luis Reservoir
Silverwood Lake
Standish-Hickey
Tahoe
Turlock Lake
Woodson Bridge
State Vehicular
Recreation Areas
Carnegie
Clay Pit
Heber Dunes
Hollister Hills
Hungry Valley
Oceano Dunes
Ocotillo Wells
Prairie City
Other
Burleigh H. Murray Ranch
California State Mining and Mineral Museum
California State Capitol Museum
California State Railroad Museum
Castro Adobe
Delta Meadows
Estero Bay
Hatton Canyon
Indio Hills Palms
Point Cabrillo Light Station
Point Lobos Ranch
Point Montara Light Station
Reynolds Wayside Campground
San Timoteo Canyon
Stone Lake
Verdugo Mountains
Ward Creek
Wildwood Canyon
National Forests and Grasslands
National Forests
and Grasslands
Angeles
Butte Valley NG
Cleveland
Eldorado
Humboldt-Toiyabe
Inyo
Klamath
Lake Tahoe Basin
Lassen
Los Padres
Mendocino
Modoc
Plumas
Rogue River – Siskiyou
San Bernardino
Sequoia
Shasta–Trinity
Sierra
Six Rivers
Stanislaus
Tahoe
National Wilderness
Preservation System
Agua Tibia
Ansel Adams
Bucks Lake
Caribou
Carson-Iceberg
Castle Crags
Cucamonga
Desolation
Dick Smith
Dinkey Lakes
Emigrant
Golden Trout
Hoover
Inyo Mountains
Ishi
Jennie Lakes
John Muir
Kaiser
Marble Mountain
Mokelumne
Mount Shasta Wilderness
North Fork
San Gabriel
Sanhedrin
San Jacinto
San Rafael
Sespe
Siskiyou
Snow Mountain
South Fork Eel River
South Sierra
South Warner
Thousand Lakes
Trinity Alps
Ventana
Yolla Bolly–Middle Eel
Yuki
Other
Giant Sequoia National Monument
San Gabriel Mountains National Monument
Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Mountains National Monument
Smith River National Recreation Area
Shasta–Trinity National Recreation Area
State Forests
Boggs Mountain Demonstration
Ellen Pickett
Jackson Demonstration
Las Posadas
LaTour Demonstration
Mount Zion
Mountain Home Demonstration
Soquel Demonstration
National Wildlife Refuges
Antioch Dunes
Bitter Creek
Blue Ridge
Butte Sink
Castle Rock
Clear Lake
Coachella Valley
Colusa
Delevan
Don Edwards San Francisco Bay
Ellicott Slough
Farallon
Guadalupe-Nipomo Dunes
Hopper Mountain
Humboldt Bay
Kern
Lower Klamath
Marin Islands
Merced
Modoc
Pixley
Sacramento
Sacramento River
Salinas River
San Diego Bay
San Diego
San Joaquin River
San Luis
San Pablo Bay
Seal Beach
Sonny Bono Salton Sea
Stone Lakes
Sutter
Tijuana Slough
Tule Lake
State Wildlife Areas
Wildlife
Areas
Antelope Valley
Ash Creek
Bass Hill
Battle Creek
Big Lagoon
Big Sandy
Biscar
Butte Valley
Buttermilk Country
Cache Creek
Camp Cady
Cantara/Ney Springs
Cedar Roughs
Cinder Flats
Collins Eddy
Colusa Bypass
Coon Hollow
Cottonwood Creek
Crescent City Marsh
Crocker Meadows
Daugherty Hill
Decker Island
Doyle
Dutch Flat
Eastlker River
Eel River
Elk Creek Wetlands
Elk River
Fay Slough
Feather River
Fitzhugh Creek
Fremont Weir
Grass Lake
Gray Lodge
Green Creek
Grizzly Island
Hallelujah Junction
Heenan Lake
Hill Slough
Hollenbeck Canyon
Honey Lake
Hope Valley
Horseshoe Ranch
Imperial
Indian Valley
Kelso Peak and Old Dad Mountains
Kinsman Flat
Knoxville
Laguna
Lake Berryessa
Lake Earl
Lake Sonoma
Little Panoche Reservoir
Los Banos
Lower Sherman Island
Mad River Slough
Marble Mountains
Mendota
Merrill's Landing
Miner Slough
Monache Meadows
Morro Bay
Moss Landing
Mouth of Cottonwood Creek
Napa-Sonoma Marshes
North Grasslands
O'Neill Forebay
Oroville
Petaluma Marsh
Pickel Meadow
Pine Creek
Point Edith
Putah Creek
Rector Reservoir
Red Lake
Rhode Island
Sacramento River
San Felipe Valley
San Jacinto
San Luis Obispo
San Luis Reservoir
San Pablo Bay
Santa Rosa
Shasta Valley
Silver Creek
Slinkard/Little Antelope
Smithneck Creek
South Fork
Spenceville
Surprise Valley
Sutter Bypass
Tehama
Truckee River
Upper Butte Basin
Volta
Warner Valley
Waukell Creek
West Hilmar
Westlker River
White Slough
Willow Creek
Yolo Bypass
Ecological
Reserves
Albany Mudflats
Alkali Sink
Allensworth
Atascadero Creek Marsh
Bair Island
Baldwin Lake
Batiquitos Lagoon
Blue Sky
Boden Canyon
Boggs Lake
Bolsa Chica
Bonny Doon
Buena Vista Lagoon
Butler Slough
Butte Creek Canyon
Butte Creek House
Buttonwillow
By Day Creek
Calhoun Cut
Canebrake
Carlsbad Highlands
Carmel Bay
Carrizo Canyon
Carrizo Plains
China Point
Clover Creek
Coachella Valley
Coal Canyon
Corte Madera Marsh
Crestridge
Dairy Mart Ponds
Dales Lake
Del Mar Landing
Eden Landing
Elkhorn Slough
Estelle Mountain
Fall River Mills
Fish Slough
Fremont Valley
Goleta Slough
Indian Joe Spring
Kaweah
Kerman
King Clone
Laguna Laurel
Loch Lomond Vernal Pool
Lokern
Magnesia Spring
Marin Islands
Mattole River
McGinty Mountain
Morro Dunes
Morro Rock
Napa River
North Table Mountain
Oasis Spring
Panoche Hills
Peytonia Slough
Pine Hill
Piute Creek
Pleasant Valley
Rancho Jamul
Redwood Shores
River Springs Lakes
Saline Valley
San Dieguito Lagoon
San Elijo Lagoon
San Felipe Creek
San Joaquin River
Santa Rosa Plateau
Springville
Stone Corral
Sycamore Canyon
Sycuan Peak
Thomes Creek
Tomales Bay
Upper Newport Bay
Watsonville Slough
West Mojave Desert
Woodbridge
Yaudanchi
Marine
Protected
Areas
Abalone Cove
Albany Mudflats
Anacapa
Anacapa
Año Nuevo
Asilomar
Atascadero Beach
Bair Island
Batiquitos Lagoon
Big Creek
Big Creek
Big Sycamore Canyon
Bodega
Bolsa Chica
Cambria
Cardiff and San Elijo
Carmel Bay
Carmel Pinnacles
Carrington Point
Catalina Marine Science Center
Corte Madera Marsh
Crystal Cove
Dana Point
Del Mar Landing
Doheny
Doheny
Duxbury Reef
Edward F. Ricketts
Elkhorn Slough
Elkhorn Slough
Encinitas
Estero de Limantour
Fagan Marsh
Farallon Islands
Farnsworth Bank
Fort Ross
Gerstle Cove
Goleta Slough
Greyhound Rock
Gull Island
Harris Point
Heisler Park
Hopkins
Irvine Coast
James V. Fitzgerald
Judith Rock
Julia Pfeiffer Burns
La Jolla
Laguna Beach
Lovers Cove (Catalina Island)
Lovers Point
MacKerricher
Manchester and Arena Rock
Marin Islands
Mia J. Tegner
Moro Cojo Slough
Morro Bay
Morro Bay
Morro Beach
Natural Bridges
Niguel
Pacific Grove Marine Gardens
Painted Cave
Peytonia Slough
Piedras Blancas
Piedras Blancas
Pismo
Pismo-Oceano Beach
Point Buchon
Point Buchon
Point Cabrillo
Point Fermin
Point Lobos
Point Reyes Headlands
Point Sur
Point Sur
Portuguese Ledge
Punta Gorda
Redwood Shores
Refugio
Richardson Rock
Robert E. Badham
Robert W. Crown
Russian Gulch
Russian River
Salt Point
San Diego-Scripps
San Dieguito Lagoon
San Elijo Lagoon
Santa Barbara Island
Scorpion
Skunk Point
Sonoma Coast
Soquel Canyon
South Laguna Beach
South Point
Swami’s
Tomales Bay
Upper Newport Bay
Van Damme
Vandenberg
White Rock (Cambria)
National Landscape Conservation System
National Monuments
California Coastal
Carrizo Plain
Fort Ord
Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Mountains
National
Conservation Areas
California Desert
King Range
Wilderness Areas
Argus Range
Big Maria Mountains
Bigelow Cholla Garden
Bighorn Mountain
Black Mountain
Bright Star
Bristol Mountains
Cadiz Dunes
Carrizo Gorge
Chemehuevi Mountains
Chimney Peak
Chuckwalla Mountains
Chumash
Cleghorn Lakes
Clipper Mountain
Coso Range
Coyote Mountains
Darwin Falls
Dead Mountains
Dick Smith
El Paso Mountains
Fish Creek Mountains
Funeral Mountains
Golden Valley
Grass Valley
Headwaters Forest Reserve
Hollow Hills
Ibex
Indian Pass
Inyo Mountains
Jacumba
Kelso Dunes
Kiavah
Kingston Range
Little Chuckwalla Mountains
Little Picacho
Machesna Mountain
Matilija
Malpais Mesa
Manly Peak
Mecca Hills
Mesquite
Newberry Mountains
Nopah Range
North Algodones Dunes
North Mesquite Mountains
Old Woman Mountains
Orocopia Mountains
Otay Mountain
Owens Peak
Pahrump Valley
Palen/McCoy
Palo Verde Mountains
Picacho Peak
Piper Mountain
Piute Mountains
Red Buttes
Resting Spring Range
Rice Valley
Riverside Mountains
Rodman Mountains
Sacatar Trail
Saddle Peak Hills
San Gorgonio
Santa Lucia
Santa Rosa
Sawtooth Mountains
Sespe
Sheephole Valley
South Nopah Range
Stateline
Stepladder Mountains
Surprise Canyon
Sylvania Mountains
Trilobite
Turtle Mountains
Whipple Mountains
National Marine Sanctuaries
Channel Islands
Cordell Bank
Greater Farallones
Monterey Bay
National Estuarine Research Reserves
Elkhorn Slough
San Francisco Bay
Tijuana River Estuary
University of California Natural Reserve System
Angelo Coast Range Reserve
Año Nuevo Island
Blue Oak Ranch Reserve
Bodega Marine
Box Springs
Boyd Deep Canyon Desert Research Center
Burns Piñon Ridge
Carpinteria Salt Marsh
Chickering American River
Coal Oil Point
Dawson Los Monos Canyon
Eagle Lake Field Station
Elliott Chaparral
Emerson Oaks
Fort Ord
Hastings
James San Jacinto Mountains
Jenny Pygmy Forest
Jepson Prairie
Kendall-Frost Mission Bay Marsh
Kenneth S. Norris Rancho Marino
Landels-Hill Big Creek
McLaughlin
Motte Rimrock
Quail Ridge
Sagehen Creek Field Station
San Joaquin Freshwater Marsh
Santa Cruz Island
Scripps Coastal
Sedgwick
Stebbins Cold Canyon
Steele Burnand Anza-Borrego
Stunt Ranch Santa Monica Mountains
Sweeney Granite Mountains Desert Research Center
Valentine Eastern Sierra
Younger Lagoon
Heritage registers
World Heritage Sites
World Network of Biosphere Reserves
National Register of Historic Places
National Historic Landmarks
National Natural Landmarks
California Historical Landmarks
California Points of Historical Interest
California Register of Historical Resources
v
t
e
National parks of the United States
Acadia
American Samoa
Arches
Badlands
Big Bend
Biscayne
Black Canyon of the Gunnison
Bryce Canyon
Canyonlands
Capitol Reef
Carlsbad Caverns
Channel Islands
Congaree
Crater Lake
Cuyahoga Valley
Death Valley
Denali
Dry Tortugas
Everglades
Gates of the Arctic
Glacier
Glacier Bay
Grand Canyon
Grand Teton
Great Basin
Great Sand Dunes
Great Smoky Mountains
Guadalupe Mountains
Haleakalā
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes
Hot Springs
Isle Royale
Joshua Tree
Katmai
Kenai Fjords
Kings Canyon
Kobuk Valley
Lake Clark
Lassen Volcanic
Mammoth Cave
Mesa Verde
Mount Rainier
North Cascades
Olympic
Petrified Forest
Pinnacles
Redwood
Rocky Mountain
Saguaro
Sequoia
Shenandoah
Theodore Roosevelt
Virgin Islands
Voyageurs
Wind Cave
Wrangell–St. Elias
Yellowstone
Yosemite
Zion
List of national parks of the United States (by elevation)
v
t
e
World Heritage Sites in the United States
Northeast
Independence Hall
Statue of Liberty
Midwest
Cahokia
South
Everglades
Great Smoky Mountains
Mammoth Cave
Monticello and the University of Virginia
Poverty Point
San Antonio Missions
West
Carlsbad Caverns
Chaco Culture National Historical Park
Grand Canyon National Park
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes National Park
Kluane-Wrangell–St. Elias-Glacier Bay-Tatshenshini-Alsek1
Mesa Verde
Olympic National Park
Pueblo de Taos
Papahānaumokuākea
Redwood
Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park1
Yellowstone National Park
Yosemite National Park
Territories
La Fortaleza and San Juan National Historic Site
1 Shared with Canada
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Redwood_National_and_State_Parks&amp;oldid=700626782"					
				Categories: IUCN Category IIRedwood National and State ParksNational parks in CaliforniaState parks of CaliforniaCoast redwood grovesOld growth forestsParks in Del Norte County, CaliforniaParks in Humboldt County, CaliforniaBeaches of Del Norte County, CaliforniaProtected areas established in 19681968 establishments in CaliforniaWorld Heritage Sites in the United StatesHidden categories: Featured articlesCoordinates on WikidataArticles which use infobox templates with no data rowsCommons category with local link different than on Wikidata				
			Navigation menu
						Personal tools
							Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in						
						Namespaces
															Article
															Talk
							Variants
						Views
															Read
															Edit
															View history
						More
							Search
			Navigation
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
			Interaction
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
			Tools
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
			Print/export
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
			Languages
						العربيةБеларускаяБългарскиCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançaisGalego한국어HrvatskiItalianoעבריתქართულიҚазақшаLatviešuLietuviųMagyarമലയാളംNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålPolskiPortuguêsРусскийSlovenčinaSuomiSvenskaไทยTürkçeTiếng ViệtWinaray中文					
				Edit links			
											 This page was last modified on 19 January 2016, at 17:36.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											Cookie statement
											Mobile view

