Saguaro National Park - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Large saguaro in the Rincon District
Location
Pima County, Arizona, United States
Nearestcity
Tucson
Coordinates
32°15′0″N 110°30′0″W﻿ / ﻿32.25000°N 110.50000°W﻿ / 32.25000; -110.50000Coordinates: 32°15′0″N 110°30′0″W﻿ / ﻿32.25000°N 110.50000°W﻿ / 32.25000; -110.50000
Area
91,442 acres (37,005ha)[1]
Established
October 14, 1994[2]
Visitors
610,045 (in2011)[3]
Governingbody
National Park Service
http://www.nps.gov/sagu/index.htm
Saguaro National Park is located in southern Arizona on the outskirts of Tucson and is a part of the United States National Park System. The park preserves the desert landscape, fauna and flora contained within two park sections, one east and the other west of Tucson. The park was established to protect its namesake—the giant saguaro cactus (Carnegiea gigantea). Saguaro in this park are near the northernmost limit of their natural survival zone within the Sonoran Desert.
Contents
1 Overview
2 Rincon Mountain District (Saguaro Park East)
3 Tucson Mountain District (Saguaro Park West)
4 Gallery of Images
5 See also
6 Notes
7 External links
Overview[edit]
The park is divided into two sections, called districts, lying approximately 20 miles (32km) east and 15 miles (24km) west of the center of the city of Tucson, Arizona. The total area in 2011 was 91,442 acres (37,005ha)[1] of which 70,905 acres (28,694ha) is designated wilderness.[4] There is a visitor center in each of the two districts. Both are easily reached by car from Tucson, but there is no public transport into the park. Both districts conserve fine tracts of the Sonoran Desert, including ranges of significant hills, the Tucson Mountains in the west and the Rincon Mountains in the east. The park gets its name from the saguaro, a large cactus which is native to the region. Many other kinds of cactus, including barrel, cholla, and prickly pear, are abundant in the park. One endangered animal, the lesser long-nosed bat, lives in the park part of the year during its migration, together with one threatened species, the Mexican spotted owl.
Saguaro National Monument was created on March 1, 1933 by President Herbert Hoover.[5] On October 14, 1994, Congress elevated Saguaro to National Park status.[2]
Facilities in the park include 150 miles (240km) of well marked and maintained hiking trails, and shorter walking trails with interpretative information available. Backcountry hiking is not advisable during the hot summer months.
Rincon Mountain District (Saguaro Park East)[edit]
The Rincon Mountain District is located at the eastern edge of Tucson, and includes the land protected in the original National Monument. Plant communities at the lower elevations in the park are typical of the Sonoran Desert, while the Rincon Mountains support a temperate coniferous forest. The highest peak in this range is Mica Mountain, at an elevation of 8,664 feet (2,641m).[6] This side of the park has fewer saguaro than its western counterpart, but they are larger in size due to higher amounts of rainfall and runoff from the Rincon Mountains.
The key feature of this district is its 8.3-mile (13.4km) Cactus Forest Loop Drive, which provides access to the two picnic areas and the central trails. Hiking on this side of the park is readily accessible to visitors. There are trailheads present at the east end of Speedway and Broadway and these are popular with equestrians, especially on weekends. Off the park's loop road there are several additional trailheads. Each Visitor Center can supply a map of hiking trails in the park.
At the southern boundary of the park is the Hope Camp Trails, which are also popular with equestrians. Access to the Hope Camp Trails is found at the end of Camino Loma Alta. This road is paved, except for the last 200 yards or so. This section of the park was added in 1991 when the United States Congress authorized the purchase of an additional 4,011 acres (1,623ha).
There are no campgrounds accessible by road in the park but the Rincon Mountain District is open to backcountry camping at designated sites. The site closest to a road is the Douglas Spring Campground, which requites a 5.9-mile (9.5km) hike. A wilderness permit is required for all overnight stays. The fee for this permit is $6.00 per campsite, per night.[7] There are no overnight accommodations for recreational vehicles in the park, but facilities are available at Colossal Cave Mountain Park which is ten miles (16km) south of the Rincon District Visitor Center on Old Spanish Trail.
Panorama, Saguaro National Park
Tucson Mountain District (Saguaro Park West)[edit]
Hohokam Petroglyphs
Kinney Road and Picture Rocks Road intersect in Saguaro National Park West. The Tucson Mountains are one of the four mountain ranges that surround Tucson. The Saguaro cactus is native to the area and can be found exclusively in the Sonoran Desert.[8] Saguaros grow at an exceptionally slow rate. The first arm of a saguaro typically starts growing sometime between 50 and 70 years of age though it may be closer to 100 years in locations where precipitation is very low.[9] The Hohokam Petroglyphs that are etched into large stones reside in Saguaro Park West.
Aside from the historical petroglyphs and imposing Saguaro cacti, desert wildlife is abundant. Coyotes, roadrunner, jack rabbits and quail are just a few of the animals that call this park home.[10]
Gallery of Images[edit]
Saguaro National Monument in 1935
Sunset, Rincon Mountain District
Wasson Peak is the highest point in the Tucson Mountain District
Panorama of cacti and mountains
Twin saguaro and flowering ocotillo
See also[edit]
Arizona portal
List of areas in the National Park System of the United States
Ironwood Forest National Monument
Notes[edit]
^ a b "Listing of acreage as of December 31, 2011". Land Resource Division, National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-07.
^ a b "The National Parks: Index 2009–2011". National Park Service. Retrieved 2011-06-06.
^ "NPS Annual Recreation Visits Report". National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-07.
^ "Saguaro Wilderness". Wilderness.net. Retrieved 2012-03-07.
^ "Saguaro Celebrates its 75th Anniversary". National Park Service. Retrieved 2011-06-06.
^ "Mica Mountain, Arizona". Peakbagger.com. Retrieved 2011-06-06.
^ "Camping in Saguaro Wilderness Area". National Park Service. Retrieved 2011-06-06.
^ https://www.desertmuseum.org/kids/oz/long-fact-sheets/Saguaro%20Cactus.php
^ http://www.nps.gov/sagu/learn/nature/how-saguaros-grow.htm
^ http://www.nps.gov/sagu/planyourvisit/directions.htm
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Saguaro National Park.
Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Saguaro National Park.
Official site: "Saguaro National Park". National Park Service. Retrieved 2011-06-03.
"Saguaro National Park". saguaro.national-park.com/. Retrieved 2011-06-03.
"Friends of Saguaro National Park". Retrieved 2011-06-03.
"Earthgoers Guide: Saguaro National Park". Retrieved 2011-06-03.
"Saguaro National Park: the last stand of the Wild West Cactus". Wanderlust: A traveler’s diary. Retrieved 2011-06-03.
David Leighton, "Street Smarts: East-side Freeman Road named for homesteading railroad man," Arizona Daily Star, Mar. 19, 2014
v
t
e
National parks of the United States
Acadia
American Samoa
Arches
Badlands
Big Bend
Biscayne
Black Canyon of the Gunnison
Bryce Canyon
Canyonlands
Capitol Reef
Carlsbad Caverns
Channel Islands
Congaree
Crater Lake
Cuyahoga Valley
Death Valley
Denali
Dry Tortugas
Everglades
Gates of the Arctic
Glacier
Glacier Bay
Grand Canyon
Grand Teton
Great Basin
Great Sand Dunes
Great Smoky Mountains
Guadalupe Mountains
Haleakalā
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes
Hot Springs
Isle Royale
Joshua Tree
Katmai
Kenai Fjords
Kings Canyon
Kobuk Valley
Lake Clark
Lassen Volcanic
Mammoth Cave
Mesa Verde
Mount Rainier
North Cascades
Olympic
Petrified Forest
Pinnacles
Redwood
Rocky Mountain
Saguaro
Sequoia
Shenandoah
Theodore Roosevelt
Virgin Islands
Voyageurs
Wind Cave
Wrangell–St. Elias
Yellowstone
Yosemite
Zion
List of national parks of the United States (by elevation)
v
t
e
Protected areas of Arizona
Federal
National Parks
Grand Canyon
Petrified Forest
Saguaro
National Historical Parks,
Historic Sites and Memorials
Tumacácori NHP
Fort Bowie NHS
Hubbell Trading Post NHS
Coronado NMem
National Monuments
National Park Service
Canyon de Chelly
Casa Grande Ruins
Chiricahua
Grand Canyon-Parashant
Hohokam Pima
Montezuma Castle
Navajo
Organ Pipe Cactus
Pipe Spring
Sunset Crater
Tonto
Tuzigoot
Walnut Canyon
Wupatki
Bureau of Land Management
Agua Fria
Ironwood Forest
Sonoran Desert
Vermilion Cliffs
National Conservation Areas
Gila Box Riparian
Las Cienegas
San Pedro Riparian
National Recreation Areas
Glen Canyon
Lake Mead
National Trails
Arizona National Scenic Trail
Juan Bautista de Anza National Historic Trail
Old Spanish National Historic Trail
National Forests
Apache-Sitgreaves
Coconino
Elden Pueblo
Palatki Heritage Site
V-Bar-V Heritage Site
Coronado
Kaibab
Prescott
Tonto
National Wildlife Refuges
Bill Williams River
Buenos Aires
Cabeza Prieta
Cibola
Havasu
Imperial
Kofa
Leslie Canyon
San Bernardino
Wilderness Areas
See List of Arizona Wilderness Areas
Wild and Scenic Rivers
Fossil Creek
Verde River
State
State Parks
Alamo Lake
Boyce Thompson Arboretum
Buckskin Mountain
Catalina
Cattail Cove
Dead Horse Ranch
Fool Hollow Lake
Fort Verde
Homolovi
Jerome
Kartchner Caverns
Lake Havasu
Lost Dutchman
Lyman Lake
McFarland
Oracle
Patagonia Lake
Picacho Peak
Red Rock
Riordan Mansion
River Island
Roper Lake
San Rafael
Slide Rock
Sonoita Creek
Tombstone Courthouse
Tonto Natural Bridge
Tubac Presidio
Verde River Greenway
Yuma Quartermaster Depot
Yuma Territorial Prison
Wildlife areas
Becker Lake
Cluff Ranch
Luna Lake
Mittry Lake
Powers Butte
Santa Rita
White Mountain Grasslands
Willcox Playa
Municipal
Nature parks
Phoenix Mountains Park and Recreation Area
South Mountain Park
Papago Park
Other
National Natural Landmarks
See List of National Natural Landmarks in Arizona
National Historic Landmarks
See List of National Historic Landmarks in Arizona
Historic Places
See National Register of Historic Places listings in Arizona
Arizona State Parks (web)
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Saguaro_National_Park&amp;oldid=703010188"					
				Categories: IUCN Category II1994 establishments in ArizonaGeography of Tucson, ArizonaNational parks in ArizonaParks in Pima County, ArizonaProtected areas established in 1994Sonoran DesertTucson metropolitan areaVisitor attractions in Tucson, ArizonaBuildings and structures in Pima County, ArizonaPetroglyphs in ArizonaHohokam rock art sitesHidden categories: Coordinates on WikidataCommons category with local link same as on Wikidata				
			Navigation menu
						Personal tools
							Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in						
						Namespaces
															Article
															Talk
							Variants
						Views
															Read
															Edit
															View history
						More
							Search
			Navigation
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
			Interaction
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
			Tools
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
			Print/export
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
			Languages
						БългарскиCatalàDanskDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançaisHrvatskiItalianoLietuviųMagyarNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålپنجابیPolskiPortuguêsРусскийSuomiSvenskaTürkçe中文					
				Edit links			
											 This page was last modified on 2 February 2016, at 23:21.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											Cookie statement
											Mobile view

