Shenandoah National Park - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Location
Virginia, United States
Nearestcity
Front Royal
Coordinates
38°32′N 78°21′W﻿ / ﻿38.533°N 78.350°W﻿ / 38.533; -78.350Coordinates: 38°32′N 78°21′W﻿ / ﻿38.533°N 78.350°W﻿ / 38.533; -78.350
Area
199,173 acres (311.208sqmi; 80,602ha; 806.02km2)[1]
Established
December 26, 1935
Visitors
1,209,883 (in2011)[2]
Governingbody
National Park Service
Shenandoah National Park encompasses part of the Blue Ridge Mountains in the U.S. state of Virginia. This national park is long and narrow, with the broad Shenandoah River and Valley on the west side, and the rolling hills of the Virginia Piedmont on the east. Although the scenic Skyline Drive is likely the most prominent feature of the park, almost 40% of the land area 79,579 acres (124.342sqmi; 32,204ha; 322.04km2) has been designated as wilderness and is protected as part of the National Wilderness Preservation System. The highest peak is Hawksbill Mountain at 4,051 feet (1,235m).
Contents
1 Geography
2 Geology
3 History
3.1 Creation of the park
3.2 Segregation and desegregation
4 Attractions
4.1 Skyline Drive
4.2 Backcountry camping
4.3 Lodging
4.3.1 Campgrounds and cabins
4.3.2 Lodges
4.4 Waterfalls
4.5 Hiking trails
4.5.1 Dark Hollow Falls Trail
4.5.2 Stony Man Trail
5 Ecology
6 Ranger programs
7 See also
8 References
9 External links
Geography[edit]
Satellite view of the heart of Shenandoah National Park at the height of the fall “leaf-peeping” season.
The park encompasses parts of eight counties. On the west side of Skyline Drive they are, from northeast to southwest, Warren, Page, Rockingham, and Augusta counties. On the east side of Skyline Drive they are Rappahannock, Madison, Greene, and Albemarle counties. The park stretches for 105 miles (169km) along Skyline Drive from near the town of Front Royal in the northeast to near the city of Waynesboro in the southwest. The park headquarters are located in Luray.
Geology[edit]
Shenandoah National Park lies along the Blue Ridge Mountains in north-central Virginia. These mountains form a distinct highland rising to elevations above 4,000 feet (1,200m). Local topographic relief between the Blue Ridge Mountains and Shenandoah Valley exceeds 3,000 feet (910m) at some locations. The crest of the range divides the Shenandoah River drainage basin, part of the Potomac River drainage, on the west side, from the James and Rappahannock River drainage basins on the east side.[3]
Some of the rocks exposed in the park date to over one billion years in age, making them among the oldest in Virginia. Bedrock in the park includes Grenville-age granitic basement rocks (1.2–1.0billion years old) and a cover sequence of metamorphosed Neoproterozoic (570-550million years old) sedimentary and volcanic rocks of the Swift Run and Catoctin formations. Columns of Catoctin Formation metamorphosed basalt can be seen at Compton Peak.[4] Clastic rocks of the Chilhowee Group are of early Cambrian age (542-520million years old). Quaternary surficial deposits are common and cover much of the bedrock throughout the park.[5][6]
The park is located along the western part of the Blue Ridge anticlinorium, a regional-scale Paleozoic structure at the eastern margin of the Appalachian fold and thrust belt. Rocks within the park were folded, faulted, distorted, and metamorphosed during the late Paleozoic Alleghanian orogeny (325 to 260million years ago).[7] The rugged topography of Blue Ridge Mountains is a result of differential erosion during the Cenozoic, although some post-Paleozoic tectonic activity occurred in the region.[8][9]
History[edit]
Creation of the park[edit]
Shenandoah was authorized in 1926 and fully established on December 26, 1935. Prior to being a park, much of the area was farmland and there are still remnants of old farms in several places. The Commonwealth of Virginia slowly acquired the land through eminent domain and then gave it to the U.S. federal government provided it would be designated a national park.[10]
In the creation of the park [the Skyline Drive right-of-way was purchased from owners without condemnation], a number of families and entire communities were required to vacate portions of the Blue Ridge Mountains. Many residents in the 500 homes in eight affected counties of Virginia were vehemently opposed to losing their homes and communities. Most of the families removed came from Madison County, Page County, and Rappahannock County.
Nearly 90% of the inhabitants worked the land for a living. Many worked in the apple orchards in the valley and in areas near the eastern slopes. The work to create the national park and Skyline Drive began following a terrible drought in 1930 which destroyed the crops of many families in the area who farmed in the mountainous terrain, as well as many of the apple orchards where they worked picking crops. Nevertheless, it remains a fact that they were displaced, often against their will, and even for a very few who managed to stay, their communities were lost. A little-known fact is that, while some families were removed by force, a few others (who mostly had also become difficult to deal with) were allowed to stay after their properties were acquired, living in the park until nature took its course and they gradually died. The policy allowed the elderly and disabled who so wished to remain with life tenancy. The last to die was Annie Lee Bradley Shenk who died in 1979 at age 92. Most of the people displaced left their homes quietly. According to the Virginia Historical Society, eighty-five-year-old Hezekiah Lam explained, "I ain't so crazy about leavin' these hills but I never believed in bein' ag'in (against) the Government. I signed everythin' they asked me."[10]
Skyline Drive
A view from Skyline Drive
Few remnants of the families that once inhabited the area that became the park have survived; this cemetery is located near Hawksbill Mountain, and is easily visible from Skyline Drive.
Detailed map of Shenandoah National Park
View from the top of Hawksbill, the park's highest mountain
Segregation and desegregation[edit]
Mount Marshall and Hogback Mountain covered in clouds in winter.
In the early 1930s, the National Park Service began planning the park facilities and envisioned separate provisions for blacks and whites. At that time, in Jim Crow Virginia, racial segregation was the order of the day. In its transfer of the parkland to the federal government, Virginia initially attempted to ban African Americans entirely from the park, but settled for enforcing its segregation laws in the park's facilities.[11]
By the 1930s, there were several concessions operated by private firms within the area that would become the park, some going back to the late 19th century. These early private facilities at Skyland Resort, Panorama Resort, and Swift Run Gap were operated only for whites. By 1937, the Park Service accepted a bid from Virginia Sky-Line Company to take over the existing facilities and add new lodges, cabins, and other amenities, including Big Meadows Lodge. Under their plan, all the sites in the parks, save one, were for "whites only". Their plan included a separate facility for African Americans at Lewis Mountain—a picnic ground, a smaller lodge, cabins and a campground. The site opened in 1939, and it was substantially inferior to the other park facilities. By then, however, the Interior Department was increasingly anxious to eliminate segregation from all parks. Pinnacles picnic ground was selected to be the initial integrated site in the Shenandoah, but Virginia Sky-Line Company continued to balk, and distributed maps showing Lewis Mountain as the only site for African Americans. During World War II, concessions closed and park usage plunged. But once the War ended, in December 1945, the NPS mandated that all concessions in all national parks were to be desegregated. In October 1947 the dining rooms of Lewis Mountain and Panorama were integrated and by early 1950, the mandate was fully accomplished.[11]
Attractions[edit]
Skyline Drive[edit]
Shenandoah National Park at one of its many scenic overlooks.
The park is best known for Skyline Drive, a 105-mile (169km) road that runs the entire length of the park along the ridge of the mountains. The drive is particularly popular in the fall when the leaves are changing colors. 101 miles (162km) of the Appalachian Trail are also in the park. In total, there are over 500 miles (800km) of trails within the park. Of the trails, one of the most popular is Old Rag Mountain, which offers a thrilling rock scramble and some of the most breathtaking views in Virginia. There is also horseback riding, camping, bicycling, and many waterfalls. The Skyline Drive is the first National Park Service road east of the Mississippi River listed as a National Historic Landmark on the National Register of Historic Places. It is also designated as a National Scenic Byway.
Backcountry camping[edit]
A backcountry camping ground.
Shenandoah National Park offers 196,000 acres (790km2) of backcountry and wilderness camping. While in the backcountry, campers must use a "Leave No Trace" policy that includes burying excrement and not building campfires. Backcountry campers must also be careful of wildlife such as bears and venomous snakes. Campers must suspend their food from trees while not in use in "bear bags" or park-approved bear canisters to prevent unintentionally feeding the bears, who then become habituated to humans and their food and therefore dangerous. All animals are protected by federal law.
Lodging[edit]
Campgrounds and cabins[edit]
Most of the campgrounds are open from April to October–November. There are five major campgrounds:[12]
Mathews Arm Campground
Big Meadows Campground
Lewis Mountain Campground
Loft Mountain Campground
Dundo Group Campground
Lodges[edit]
There are three lodges/cabins:[13]
Skyland Resort
Big Meadows
Lewis Mountain Cabins
Lodges are located at Skyland and Big Meadows. The park's Harry F. Byrd Visitor Center is also located at Big Meadows. Another visitor center is located at Dickey Ridge. Campgrounds are located at Mathews Arm, Big Meadows, Lewis Mountain, and Loft Mountain.
Rapidan Camp, the restored presidential fishing retreat Herbert Hoover built on the Rapidan River in 1929, is accessed by a 4.1-mile (6.6km) round-trip hike on Mill Prong Trail, which begins on the Skyline Drive at Milam Gap (Mile 52.8). The NPS also offers guided van trips that leave from the Byrd Center at Big Meadows.
Shenandoah National Park is one of the most dog-friendly in the national park system. The campgrounds all allow dogs, and dogs are allowed on almost all of the trails including the Appalachian Trail, if kept on leash (6 feet or shorter).[14]
Streams and rivers in the park are very popular with fly fisherman for native brook trout.[15]
Waterfalls[edit]
Many waterfalls are located within the park boundaries. Below is a list of significant falls.[16]
Falls
Height
Location
Description
Overall Run
93ft (28 m)
Mile 21.1, parking lot just south of Hogback Overlook
The tallest waterfall in the park. 6.5 mile (10km) round trip hike. Go before June as this waterfall tends to dry up.
Whiteoak Canyon
86ft (26 m)
Mile 42.6, Whiteoak Canyon parking area
Whiteoak Canyon has a series of six waterfalls, the first (and tallest) is 86 feet (28 m). Not all the falls are easily accessible from the trail. Start at the lowest and work your way up to the tallest waterfall.
Cedar Run
34ft (10 m)
Mile 45.6, Hawksbill Gap parking area
Difficult 3.4 mile (5km) round trip hike. Sights along the way include waterfalls, swimming holes, and natural rock slides of varying lengths.
Rose River
67ft (20 m)
Mile 49.4, parking at Fishers Gap Overlook
A 2.6 mile (4km) round trip hike. Can also be done as a longer loop hike.
Dark Hollow Falls
70ft (21 m)
Mile 50.7, Dark Hollow Falls parking area
1.4 mile (2km) round trip hike. The closest waterfall to Skyline Drive and the most popular. No pets allowed on this trail.
Lewis Falls
81ft (25 m)
Mile 51.4, parking lot just south of Big Meadows, next to a service road
2 mile (3km) round trip hike.
South River Falls
83ft (25 m)
Mile 62.8, park at South River picnic area
3.3 mile (5km) loop hike to an overlook above the falls. There is also a rocky, 1 mile (2km) round trip spur trail that goes to the base of the falls. The "shortcut" is before the overlook but watch out for water snakes as they're very common in this area.
Doyles River Falls
28 and 63ft (9 and 19 m)
Mile 81.1, Doyles River parking area
A 3-mile (5km) round trip hike to see both the upper and lower falls. Be sure to go a little past the lower falls viewing spot for a better view. Can also be turned into a 7.8 mile (13km) loop trail that also goes by Jones Run Falls
Jones Run Falls
42ft (13 m)
Mile 84.1, Jones Run parking area
A 3.6 mile (6km) round trip hike. Can also be turned into a longer loop hike that goes by Doyles River upper and lower falls
Whiteoak Canyon.
Rose River Falls.
South River Falls.
Dark Hollow Falls.
Jones Run Falls.
Hiking trails[edit]
Dark Hollow Falls Trail[edit]
Beginning at mile 50.7 of the Skyline Drive near the Byrd Visitor Center, Dark Hollow Falls Trail leads downhill beside a creek called Hogcamp Branch to Dark Hollow Falls, a 70-foot cascade. The distance from the trailhead to the base of the falls is 0.7 mile, although the trail continues beyond that point, crossing the creek and connecting with the Rose River fire road.[17] Various fauna can be viewed along the trail, including occasional sightings of black bear and timber rattlesnake.[18] While the trail is relatively short, parts of it are steep and may prove challenging to some visitors. There is no view from the brink of the falls, and slippery rocks make it inadvisable to leave the trail.[17]
Dark Hollow Falls
Wildlife at Dark Hollow
The stream leading to the Dark Hollow Falls
The trail leading to the Dark Hollow Falls
Stony Man Trail[edit]
This is one of the most scenic trails in the skyline drive. It ends up at a cliff and offers a beautiful overlook. It is ideal to watch sunset. Pets and horses are not allowed in this trail.[19]
From the top of stony man cliff
Beginning of the trail
Ecology[edit]
Deer at Tanner Ridge Overlook.
Juvenile American black bear at Old Rag mountain.
The climate of the park, and in turn also its flora and fauna, is largely typical for mountainous regions of the eastern Mid-Atlantic woodland, and indeed a large portion of common species are typical of ecosystems at lower altitudes as well. On southwestern faces of some of the southernmost hillsides pine predominates and there is also the occasional prickly pear cactus which grows naturally. In contrast, some of the northeastern aspects are most likely to have small but dense stands of moisture loving hemlocks and mosses in abundance. Other commonly found plants include oak, hickory, chestnut, maple, tulip poplar, mountain laurel, milkweed, daisies, and many species of ferns. The once predominant American chestnut tree was effectively brought to extinction by a fungus known as the chestnut blight during the 1930s – though the tree continues to grow in the park, it does not reach maturity and dies back before it can reproduce. Various species of oaks superseded the chestnuts and became the dominant tree species. Gypsy moth infestations beginning in the early 1990s began to erode the dominance of the oak forests as the moths would primarily consume the leaves of oak trees. Though the Gypsy moths seem to have abated some, they continue to affect the forest and have destroyed almost 10 percent of the oak groves.[20]
Mammals include white-tailed deer, black bear, bobcat, raccoon, skunk, opossum, groundhog, red fox, gray fox, coyote and eastern cottontail rabbit. Though unsubstantiated, there have been some reported sightings of mountain lion in remote areas of the park.[21]
Over 200 species of birds make their home in the park for at least part of the year. About thirty live in the park year round, including the barred owl, Carolina chickadee, red-tailed hawk, and wild turkey. The peregrine falcon was reintroduced into the park in the mid-1990s and by the end of the 20th century there were numerous nesting pairs in the park.[22]
Thirty-two species of fish have been documented in the park, including brook trout, longnose and blacknose dace, and the bluehead chub.[23]
Ranger programs[edit]
Park rangers organize several programs from spring to fall. These include ranger-led hikes, as well as discussions of the history, flora, and fauna.[24]
See also[edit]
National parks (United States)
List of amphibians in the Shenandoah National Park
List of national parks
Skyland Resort
Big Meadows
Hawksbill Mountain
Humpback Rock
Old Rag Mountain
Neighbor Mountain
Pignut Mountain
Knob Mountain
References[edit]
^ "Listing of acreage as of December 31, 2011". Land Resource Division, National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-07.
^ "NPS Annual Recreation Visits Report". National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-07.
^ "GOL 135: The geology of Shenandoah National Park, Virginia". nvcc.edu. Retrieved 17 June 2015.
^ Callan Bentley (14 November 2011). "Compton Peak: superb columnar jointing". Callan Bentley's blog Mountain Beltway on American Geophysical Union Blogosphere. Retrieved 24 July 2015.
^ http://www.dmme.virginia.gov/DMR3/dmrpdfs/VGFC-2009.pdf
^ Scott Southworth (17 June 2015). "Geologic Map of the Shenandoah National Park Region, Virginia". usgs.gov. Retrieved 17 June 2015.
^ Hatcher, R.D. "Tracking Lower-to-Mid-to-Upper Crustal Deformation Processes through Time and Space through Three Paleozoic Orogenies in the Southern Appalachians Using Dated Metamorphic Assemblages and Faults". Geological Society of America Abstracts with Programs v. 40, p. 513. Geological Society of America. Retrieved 2012-01-23.
^ "Google Earth Multimedia". wm.edu. Retrieved 7 May 2015.
^ "Geological Evolution of Virginia and the Mid-Atlantic Region". jmu.edu. Retrieved 7 May 2015.
^ a b Shenandoah National Park. vahistory.org. Retrieved on September 22, 2007.
^ a b Engle, Reed (January 1996). "Shenandoah National Park – Segregation / Desegregation". National Park Service. Retrieved 2007-09-10.
^ "Campgrounds – Shenandoah National Park (U.S. National Park Service)". nps.gov. Retrieved 7 May 2015.
^ "Ooops! Page Not Found – Aramark Leisure". visitshenandoah.com. Retrieved 7 May 2015.
^ "Official SNP Pet Policy." National Park Service. Retrieved on September 22, 2007.
^ Slone, Harry (1991). Virginia Trout Streams-A guide to fishing the Blue Ridge watershed. Woodstock, Vermont: Backcounty Publications. pp.37–54. ISBN0-88150-207-3.
^ Nicole Blouin, Steve; Bordonaro, Marilou W (1996). Waterfalls of the Blue Ridge. Menasha Ridge Press. ISBN0-89732-190-1.
^ a b "Fishers Gap to Naked Creek Overlook". Guide to Shenandoah National Park and Skyline Drive. Retrieved 2012-06-26.
^ Virginia Birding and Wildlife Trail» Mountain Trail» Skyline Drive» Dark Hollow Falls Trail, Shenandoah National Park
^ Virginia Birding and Wildlife Trail» Mountain Trail» Skyline Drive» Stony Man Trail, Shenandoah National Park
^ "Shenandoah National Park – Forests". National Park Service. Retrieved 2007-09-10.
^ "Shenandoah National Park – Mammals". National Park Service. Retrieved 2007-09-01.
^ "Shenandoah National Park – Birds". National Park Service. Retrieved 2007-09-01.
^ "Shenandoah National Park – Fish". National Park Service. Retrieved 2007-09-01.
^ "Ranger Programs – Shenandoah National Park (U.S. National Park Service)". nps.gov. Retrieved 7 May 2015.
"A Guide to the Shenandoah Valley Oral History Project, 2005–2006".
External links[edit]
Find more about
Shenandoah National Park
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from Commons
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Official Shenandoah National Park website
Interactive Virtual Tours of Shenandoah National Park
Shenandoah National Park— When Past is Present: Archaeology of the Displaced in Shenandoah National Park
NASA Earth Observatory Satellite images of Shenandoah National Park, and park's vicinity
Henry Heatwole's Guide to Shenandoah National Park and Skyline Drive
United States Geological Survey: Geologic Map of the Shenandoah National Park Region, Virginia
State Tourism Website – Virginia is for Lovers
The Ground Beneath Our Feet online exhibit of the Virginia Historical Society regarding creation of the Shenandoah National Park
Shenandoah Pictures – overlook, gap, parking area maps and pictures
v
t
e
National parks of the United States
Acadia
American Samoa
Arches
Badlands
Big Bend
Biscayne
Black Canyon of the Gunnison
Bryce Canyon
Canyonlands
Capitol Reef
Carlsbad Caverns
Channel Islands
Congaree
Crater Lake
Cuyahoga Valley
Death Valley
Denali
Dry Tortugas
Everglades
Gates of the Arctic
Glacier
Glacier Bay
Grand Canyon
Grand Teton
Great Basin
Great Sand Dunes
Great Smoky Mountains
Guadalupe Mountains
Haleakalā
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes
Hot Springs
Isle Royale
Joshua Tree
Katmai
Kenai Fjords
Kings Canyon
Kobuk Valley
Lake Clark
Lassen Volcanic
Mammoth Cave
Mesa Verde
Mount Rainier
North Cascades
Olympic
Petrified Forest
Pinnacles
Redwood
Rocky Mountain
Saguaro
Sequoia
Shenandoah
Theodore Roosevelt
Virgin Islands
Voyageurs
Wind Cave
Wrangell–St. Elias
Yellowstone
Yosemite
Zion
List of national parks of the United States (by elevation)
v
t
e
Protected areas of Virginia
Federal
National Parks
Shenandoah
National Historical Parks,
Historic Sites &amp; Monuments
Appomattox Court House NHP
Arlington House
Booker T. Washington NM
Cedar Creek and Belle Grove NHP
Claude Moore Colonial Farm
Colonial NHP
Cumberland Gap NHP
George Washington Birthplace NM
Harpers Ferry NHP
Maggie L. Walker NHS
National Military Parks,
Battlefields &amp; Battlefield Parks
Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania NMP
Manassas NBP
Petersburg NB
Richmond NBP
National Cemeteries
Alexandria
Arlington
Balls Bluff
City Point
Cold Harbor
Culpeper
Danville
Fort Harrison
Fredericksburg
Glendale
Hampton
Hampton VA
Poplar Grove
Quantico
Richmond
Seven Pines
Staunton
Winchester
Yorktown
National Parkways
Blue Ridge Parkway
George Washington Memorial Parkway
National Trails
Appalachian Trail
Captain John Smith Chesapeake NHT
Overmountain Victory NHT
Potomac Heritage Trail
Star-Spangled Banner NHT
National
Wildlife Refuges
Back Bay
Chincoteague
Eastern Shore of Virginia
Mason Neck
Featherstone
Fisherman Island
Great Dismal Swamp
James River
Nansemond
Occoquan Bay
Plum Tree Island
Presquile
Rappahannock River Valley
Wallops Island
National Forests
George Washington and Jefferson
USFS National Recreation Areas
Mount Rogers National Recreation Area
Other NPS Areas
Assateague Island National Seashore
Chesapeake Bay Gateways Network
Prince William Forest Park
Wolf Trap NP for the Performing Arts
Wilderness Areas
Mountain Lake Wilderness
Ramseys Draft Wilderness
Rough Mountain Wilderness
Saint Mary's Wilderness
National Estuarine
Research Reserves
Chesapeake Bay
State
State parks
Bear Creek Lake
Belle Isle
Biscuit Run
Breaks Interstate
Caledon
Chippokes Plantation
Claytor Lake
Douthat
Fairy Stone
False Cape
First Landing
Grayson Highlands
High Bridge Trail
Holliday Lake
Hungry Mother
James River
Kiptopeke
Lake Anna
Leesylvania
Mason Neck
Natural Tunnel
New River Trail
Occoneechee
Pocahontas
Sailor's Creek Battlefield
Shot Tower
Shenandoah River
Sky Meadows
Smith Mountain Lake
Southwest Virginia Museum
Staunton River
Staunton River Battlefield
Tabb Monument
Twin Lakes
Westmoreland
Wilderness Road
York River
State forests
Appomattox-Buckingham
Big Woods
Bourassa
Browne
Channels
Chilton Woods
Conway-Robinson
Crawfords
Cumberland
Devil's Backbone
Dragon Run
Hawks
Lesesne
Matthews
Moore's Creek
Niday Place
Paul
Prince Edward-Gallion
Sandy Point
Whitney
Zoar
Natural Area
Preserves
Antioch Pines
Bethel Beach
Big Spring Bog
Blackwater
Buffalo Mountain
Bull Run Mountains
Bush Mill Stream
Camp Branch Wetlands
Cape Charles Coastal Habitat
The Cedars
The Channels
Cherry Orchard Bog
Chestnut Creek Wetlands
Chestnut Ridge
Chotank Creek
Chub Sandhill
Cleveland Barrens
Clover Hollow
Cowbane Prairie
Crow's Nest
Cumberland Marsh
Dameron Marsh
Deep Run Ponds
Dendron Swamp
Difficult Creek
Elklick Woodlands
False Cape
Folly Mills Creek Fen
Goshen Pass
Grafton Ponds
Grassy Hill
Grayson Glades
Hickory Hollow
Hughlett Point
Johnsons Creek
Magothy Bay
Mark's and Jack's Island
Mount Joy Pond
Mutton Hunk Fen
Naked Mountain
New Point Comfort
North Landing River
Northwest River
Ogdens Cave
Parkers Marsh
Parramore Island
Pedlars Hill
Pinnacle
Poor Mountain
Red Rock Mountain
Savage Neck Dunes
Unthanks Cave
William B. Trower Bayshore
Wreck Island
Wildlife
Management Areas
Amelia
Big Survey
Briery Creek
Chester F. Phelps
Cavalier
Chickahominy
Clinch Mountain
Crooked Creek
Dick Cross
Fairystone Farms
Featherfin
G. Richard Thompson
Game Farm Marsh
Goshen and Little North Mountain
Hardware River
Havens
Hidden Valley
Highland
Hog Island
Horsepen Lake
James River
Land's End
Mockhorn Island
Pettigrew
Powhatan
Princess Anne
Ragged Island
Rapidan
Saxis
Stewarts Creek
T. M. Gathright
Turkeycock
Weston
White Oak Mountain
Other
Registered Historic
Places in Virginia
Virginia Landmarks Register
National Register of Historic Places listings in Virginia
Bridges
National Historic Landmarks
Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation
Virginia Department of Forestry
Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries
Virginia Department of Historic Resources
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shenandoah_National_Park&amp;oldid=701695023"					
				Categories: IUCN Category IIShenandoah National ParkNational parks in VirginiaBlue Ridge MountainsParks in Augusta County, VirginiaParks in Albemarle County, VirginiaParks in Rockingham County, VirginiaParks in Greene County, VirginiaParks in Page County, VirginiaParks in Madison County, VirginiaParks in Rappahannock County, VirginiaParks in Warren County, Virginia1935 establishments in VirginiaProtected areas established in 1935Civilian Conservation Corps in VirginiaHidden categories: Coordinates on Wikidata				
			Navigation menu
						Personal tools
							Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in						
						Namespaces
															Article
															Talk
							Variants
						Views
															Read
															Edit
															View history
						More
							Search
			Navigation
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
			Interaction
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
			Tools
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
			Print/export
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
			Languages
						БългарскиCatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschفارسیFrançaisHrvatskiItalianoעבריתNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålپنجابیPolskiPortuguêsРусскийSuomiSvenskaTürkçeУкраїнська中文					
				Edit links			
											 This page was last modified on 26 January 2016, at 00:55.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											Cookie statement
											Mobile view

