                            Password:
                                Forgot
                                    your password? | Change
                                    Password
                        Set up your KU Online ID | Help
                        Access to electronic resources at the University of Kansas is
                        restricted to employees, students, or other individuals authorized
                        by the University or its affiliates. Use of this system is subject
                        to all policies and procedures set forth by the University located
                        at www.policy.ku.edu.
                        Unauthorized use is prohibited and may result in administrative or
                        legal action. The University may monitor the use of this system
                        for purposes related to security management, system operations,
                        and intellectual property compliance.
                    Technology Help
                                    785-864-8080
                                        Phone support
                                    itcsc@ku.edu
                                        Support via Email
                                    Faculty/Staff Support
                                        Technology Support Centers
                                    Knowledge Base
                                        FAQs &amp; More
                                    Virtual Service Desk
                                        Online Help
                        Comments or ideas on how we can serve you better? Send us your feedback!
            &nbsp;
	                                    Athletics
	                                    Alumni
	                                    Admissions
	                                    Campuses
	                                    Give to KU
	                                    Jobs
	                                Contact KU
	                                Lawrence, KS | Maps    
	                                The University of Kansas prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, ethnicity, religion, sex, national origin, age, ancestry, disability, status as a veteran, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, retaliation, gender identity, gender expression and genetic information in the University&#8217;s programs and activities. Retaliation is also prohibited by university policy. The following persons have been designated to handle inquiries regarding the nondiscrimination policies and are the Title IX coordinators for their respective campuses: Executive Director of the Office of Institutional Opportunity &amp; Access, IOA@ku.edu, 1246 West Campus Road, Room 153A, Lawrence, KS 66045, 785-864-6414, 711 TTY (for the Lawrence, Edwards, Parsons, Yoder, and Topeka campuses); Director, Equal Opportunity Office, Mail Stop 7004, 4330 Shawnee Mission Parkway, Fairway, KS 66205, 913-588-8011, 711 TTY (for the Wichita, Salina, and Kansas City, Kansas, medical center campuses).

