      Study uncovers social-status stigma surrounding pregnancy issues | The University of Kansas
            People Search
        Degree Search
Browse by school    
        Course Search
Search class sections | Online courses
        Library Search
Libraries | Hours &amp; locations | Ask
    Advising | Catalog | Tutors
    Writing Center | Math help room
    Finals Schedule | GPA Calculator
          CMS Login: KU Users | Non-KU Users
    KU Home
    About KU
    Admissions
    Athletics
    Alumni
    Campuses
    Social Media
    Endowment
    KU Today
                                The University of Kansas
      Search form
  Search this site 
      Home
About KU
Academics
Admission
Research
Libraries&raquo;
Outreach
NewsKU Today
News archive
Media Resources &raquo;
News Staff &raquo;
Alerts &raquo;
Events
      MenuHome
About KU
Academics
Admission
Research
Libraries&raquo;
Outreach
NewsKU Today
News archive
Media Resources &raquo;
News Staff &raquo;
Alerts &raquo;
Events
Search
      Search form
  Search this site 
            HomeStudy uncovers social-status stigma surrounding pregnancy issues  
      Contact
          George Diepenbrock    
          KU News Service    
          785-864-8853    
          gdiepenbrock@ku.edu    
        Study uncovers social-status stigma surrounding pregnancy issues
        Tue, 04/26/2016
    LAWRENCE — For years, researchers have found the social stigma surrounding infertility has negative health implications for women experiencing it and can serve as both a visible and invisible hardship.
A new study by University of Kansas researchers has confirmed these findings, yet they also found that women seeking fertility treatments in online comments themselves tend to challenge and stigmatize pregnant women for their perceived immoral behaviors or a lower social status.
The researchers said the findings provide a link in how societal stigmas surface and insights into the challenges facing pregnancy-related social relationships, especially surrounding motherhood and perceptions of class.
"Issues of fairness and unfairness and whether someone is deserving or undeserving of motherhood consistently appeared in women's forum postings. While these feelings aren’t necessarily unique to women experiencing infertility, they highlight how stigmatized groups continue to define social norms regarding the 'proper' path to motherhood, particularly along social-status lines," said Jarron Saint Onge, assistant professor in the Department of Sociology.
The study was published recently in the journal Social Science &amp; Medicine. Saint Onge and lead author Natalie Jansen, doctoral student in sociology, examined 432 initial conversation threads posted by women in various stages of the fertility-seeking treatment process in the online forum, Fertile Thoughts.
In response to frequently mentioned experiences of insensitivity or hurtful behaviors, many women appeared to use the forum as a coping strategy, the researchers said. In the anonymous online postings, infertile women frequently appeared to denounce fertile friends and family members, in some cases describing pregnant women as "fat cows, ferts, the fertiles, Fertile-Myrtles or momzillas-to-be."
The researchers also found several instances of women struggling with fertility issues using remarks to elevate their own positions in comparison, including questioning why "God would give children to such a terrible person" or to a woman "and her cheating hubby." Posters to the forum also consistently showed that being pregnant and on welfare were perceived as less acceptable than being pregnant with more financial stability, which is a near requisite for fertility treatments, the researchers said.
"Propagating comments about low-income mothers led to common definitions of acceptable and unacceptable behavior," the researchers wrote.
And by equating low socioeconomic status with undeserving motherhood, women struggling with fertility issues in the posts appeared to be rectifying their own feelings of unfairness in the situation, they said.
Other criticisms from posters focused on fertile women using drugs and alcohol or teenagers or couples who became pregnant outside of marriage.
Jansen said the study is not meant to pass judgment on women experiencing fertility issues but that it's important to study how stigmas surface in this area because infertility can be one of the most heartbreaking things a person can experience. Having an anonymous online forum allowed infertile women to maintain positive social relationships through their struggles, especially with women having common experiences, she said, which is important because infertility affects nearly 30 percent of U.S. women between the ages of 25 and 44.
"It's important to note that the women are operating under pre-existing stereotypes about the ‘right way’ to go about motherhood, and these preconceived notions are likely the driving force behind their comments," Jansen said. "Their own disappointment may be exacerbating it. These stigma dynamics are complex, and while we normally think of one person being stigmatized and another person doing the stigmatizing, in reality people can play different roles depending on the situation they're in."
The researchers said the study could hopefully provide more awareness and insight on stigma in general and how certain stereotypes, though possibly not always viewed or often talked about on the surface, can still cause harm.
"Actions toward fertility-treatment seeking women may have unintended perceived effects of stigmatization or marginalization, even if well-intentioned," said Saint Onge, who also serves in the KU Medical Center's Department of Health Policy and Management within the School of Medicine. "These actions can have potentially damaging effects on important social relationships."
        The University of Kansas is a major comprehensive research and teaching university. The university's mission
            is to lift students and society by educating leaders, building healthy communities and making discoveries
            that change the world. The KU News Service is the central public relations office for the Lawrence campus.
        kunews@ku.edu | 1450 Jayhawk Blvd., Suite 37, Lawrence, KS 66045
                    Search all KU News
                        Search All KU News 
        Search options »
        Subscribe to  KU Today
              KU in the news
          The Deseret News &mdash; Mon, 05/02/2016    
          How to reap the financial benefits of your degree    
          http://finance.yahoo.com/news/skin-cancer-deadly-free-screenings-161542679.html &mdash; Mon, 05/02/2016    
          Skin cancer can be deadly: Get in on free screenings to lower your risk    
                    #TreatYoSELF : an event to help @LCSKansas  through KU's SELF organization. https://t.co/LkVaIinKjH  See you there! https://t.co/aRC9D7xHzR 
                    &laquo;&raquo;
                    Follow us on Twitter &raquo;
    .twitter{
        z-index:999;
    }
            Why KU
                                    Apply &raquo;
                                            One of 34 U.S. public institutions in the prestigious Association of American Universities
                                            26 prestigious Rhodes Scholars &mdash; more than all other Kansas colleges combined
                                            Nearly $290 million in financial aid annually
                                            44 nationally ranked graduate programs.
&mdash;U.S. News &amp; World Report
                                            Top 50 nationwide for size of library collection.
&mdash;ALA
                                            23rd nationwide for service to veterans
&mdash;"Best for Vets," Military Times
        Give to KU &raquo;
    KU Today
      Contact The University of Kansas
                            785-864-2700
        1450 Jayhawk Blvd.
Lawrence, KS 66045
785-864-2700    
	Facebook Twitter YouTube
		Instagram Foursquare Pintrest
		All social media at KU &raquo;
      Academics
		Admissions
		Alumni
Athletics
		Campuses
		Contacts
Giving
		Jobs
		Maps
    The University of Kansas prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, ethnicity, religion, sex, national origin, age, ancestry, disability, status as a veteran, sexual orientation, marital status, parental status, gender identity, gender expression, and genetic information in the university’s programs and activities. Retaliation is also prohibited by university policy. The following persons have been designated to handle inquiries regarding the nondiscrimination policies and are the Title IX coordinators for their respective campuses: Executive Director of the Office of Institutional Opportunity & Access, IOA@ku.edu, 1246 West Campus Road, Room 153A, Lawrence, KS 66045, 785-864-6414, 711 TTY (for the Lawrence, Edwards, Parsons, Yoder, and Topeka campuses); Director, Equal Opportunity Office, Mail Stop 7004, 4330 Shawnee Mission Parkway, Fairway, KS 66205, 913-588-8011, 711 TTY (for the Wichita, Salina, and Kansas City, Kansas, medical center campuses).

