Theodore Roosevelt National Park - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Hoodoo rock formation
Location
Billings County &amp; McKenzie County, North Dakota, USA
Nearestcity
Medora
Coordinates
46°58′N 103°27′W﻿ / ﻿46.967°N 103.450°W﻿ / 46.967; -103.450Coordinates: 46°58′N 103°27′W﻿ / ﻿46.967°N 103.450°W﻿ / 46.967; -103.450
Area
70,446 acres (110.072sqmi; 28,508ha; 285.08km2)[1]
Established
November10,1978(1978-November-10)
Visitors
563,407 (in2011)[2]
Governingbody
National Park Service
Theodore Roosevelt National Park is a United States National Park comprising three geographically separated areas of badlands in western North Dakota. The park was named for U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt. The park covers 70,446 acres (110.072sqmi; 28,508ha; 285.08km2) of land in three sections: the North Unit, the South Unit, and the Elkhorn Ranch Unit.
The park's larger South Unit lies alongside Interstate 94 near Medora, North Dakota. The smaller North Unit is situated about 80mi (130km) north of the South Unit, on U.S. Highway 85, just south of Watford City, North Dakota. Roosevelt's Elkhorn Ranch is located between the North and South units, approximately 20mi (32km) west of US 85 and Fairfield, North Dakota. The Little Missouri River flows through all three units of the park. The Maah Daah Hey Trail connects all three units.
Contents
1 History
1.1 Roosevelt connection
1.2 Park development
2 Attractions
3 Gallery
4 See also
5 Notes
6 External links
History[edit]
Roosevelt connection[edit]
Roosevelt first came to the North Dakota badlands to hunt bison in September 1883. During that first short trip, he got his bison and fell in love with the rugged lifestyle and the "perfect freedom" of the West. He invested $14,000 in the Maltese Cross Ranch, which was already being managed by Sylvane Ferris and Bill Merrifield seven miles south of Medora. That winter, Ferris and Merrifield built the Maltese Cross Cabin. After the death of both his wife and his mother on February 14, 1884, Teddy Roosevelt returned to his North Dakota ranch seeking solitude and time to heal. That summer, he started his second ranch, the Elkhorn Ranch, 35 miles north of Medora, which he hired two Maine woodsmen, Bill Sewall and Wilmot Dow, to operate. Teddy Roosevelt took great interest in his ranches and in hunting in the West, detailing his experiences in pieces published in eastern newspapers and magazines. He wrote three major works on his life in the West: "Ranch Life and the Hunting Trail," "Hunting Trips of a Ranchman," and "The Wilderness Hunter." His adventures in "the strenuous life" outdoors and the loss of his cattle in the starvation winter in 1886-1887 were influential in Theodore Roosevelt's pursuit of conservation policies as President of the United States (1901–1909).
Park development[edit]
Following Theodore Roosevelt's death in 1919, the Little Missouri Badlands were explored to determine possible park sites. Civilian Conservation Corps camps were established in both of the future park units from 1934 to 1941, and they developed roads and other structures in use today. The area was designated the Roosevelt Recreation Demonstration Area in 1935. In 1946 it was transferred to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service as the Theodore Roosevelt National Wildlife Refuge. President Truman established the Theodore Roosevelt National Memorial Park on April 25, 1947, the only National Memorial Park ever established. In 1978, in addition to boundary adjustments and the establishment of 29,920 acres (121.1km2) of the Theodore Roosevelt Wilderness, the park's designation was changed to Theodore Roosevelt National Park.
Attractions[edit]
Cannonball concretions[3] in the North Unit
Both main units of the park have scenic drives, approximately 100 miles of foot and horse trails, wildlife viewing, and opportunities for back country hiking and camping. There are three developed campgrounds: Juniper Campground in the North Unit, Cottonwood Campground in the South Unit, and the Roundup Group Horse Campground in the South Unit.
One of the most popular attractions is wildlife viewing. The park is home to a wide variety of Great Plains wildlife including bison, mountain lion, feral horses, elk, bighorn sheep, white-tailed deer and mule deer, prairie dogs, and at least 186 species of birds including golden eagles, sharp-tailed grouse, and wild turkeys. Bison may be dangerous and visitors are advised to view them from a distance. Bison, elk, and bighorn sheep have been successfully reintroduced to the park.
The scenery changes constantly in relationship with the seasons. The brown, dormant grass dominates from late summer through the winter, but explodes into green color in the early summer along with hundreds of species of flowering plants. Winter can be a beautiful scene as snow covers the sharp terrain of the badlands and locks the park into what Theodore Roosevelt called "an abode of iron desolation."
Theodore Roosevelt's Maltese Cross Cabin
The badlands are very important in Theodore Roosevelt's life, and the park memorializes his contributions to the conservation of America's natural resources. A museum at the South Unit Visitor Center provides background on Theodore Roosevelt and his ranching days. Roosevelt's Maltese Cross Cabin is open for public viewing year-round at the South Unit Visitor Center.
Roosevelt's Elkhorn Ranch is a remote area of the park, 35 miles north of Medora, accessible by gravel roads. Check with park rangers for road conditions and routes to travel to the site. The foundation of the ranch house and other shops buildings have been preserved, though the other portions of the cabin were removed and re-purposed after Roosevelt vacated the ranch. Threats to the Elkhorn Ranch site include oil development on adjacent lands, particularly visual intrusions and noise pollution from oil facilities and traffic.
The park is popular for back country hiking and horseback riding. Permits for back country camping may be obtained at the South Unit or North Unit Visitor Centers. Over 100 miles of trail make it a fine hiking park, though water and shade are limited along trails. The park units are mostly surrounded by Forest Service grasslands. The area has very dark night skies with excellent star gazing and occasional northern lights.
The entire park has been surrounded with a 7-foot (2.1m) tall woven wire fence to keep bison and feral horses inside the park and commercial livestock out. Other animals are able to pass over, under, or through the fence in specific locations provided for that purpose.
The town of Medora, at the entrance to the south unit, provides a touristy western experience, with wooden planked sidewalks, old fashioned ice cream parlors, and buggy rides. There are several museums and the Burning Hills Amphitheather with nightly productions of the "Medora Musical" from early June to early September.
Park officials manage populations of bison, horses, and elk to maintain a balanced ecosystem. Biologists also monitor prairie dog towns, though the park only controls their population in instances where they pose a threat to buildings or human health.
Gallery[edit]
Nokota horses
Badlands during a winter night
Nakota horses and corralled bison
See also[edit]
Badlands
Elkhorn Ranch
Maltese Cross Cabin
Nokota horse
Notes[edit]
^ "Listing of acreage as of December 31, 2011". Land Resource Division, National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-05-13.
^ "NPS Annual Recreation Visits Report". National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-05-13.
^ "Theodore Roosevelt National Park North Unit Scenic Byway". Retrieved 2012-05-13.
External links[edit]
Find more about
Theodore Roosevelt National Park
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from Commons
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
Official Theodore Roosevelt National Park website
"Writings of Theodore Roosevelt", broadcast from Theodore Roosevelt National Park from C-SPAN's American Writers
U.S. Geological Survey Geographic Names Information System: Theodore Roosevelt National Memorial Park
 Media related to Theodore Roosevelt National Park at Wikimedia Commons
v
t
e
Theodore Roosevelt
26th President of the United States, 1901–1909
25th Vice President of the United States, 1901
33rd Governor of New York, 1899–1900
Assistant Secretary of the Navy, 1897–1898
New York City Police Commissioner, 1895–1897
New York State Assemblyman, 1882
1883
1884
Presidency
First inauguration
historic site
Second inauguiration
"Square Deal"
Booker T. Washington dinner
Conservation
Newlands Reclamation Act
Transfer Act of 1905
Antiquities Act
Pelican Island
Devils Tower National Monument
Muir Woods National Monument
Other National Monuments
United States Forest Service,
United States Reclamation Service
National Wildlife Refuge System
Roosevelt Arch
Conference of Governors
Northern Securities Company breakup
court case
Coal Strike of 1902
Pure Food and Drug Act
Food and Drug Administration
Meat Inspection Act
Expediting Act
Elkins Act
Hepburn Act
Aldrich–Vreeland Act
Federal Employers Liability Act
Kinkaid Act
Big Stick ideology
Hay–Bunau-Varilla Treaty
Panama Canal Zone
Panama Canal
Venezuela Crisis
Roosevelt Corollary
Occupation of Cuba
Russo-Japanese War
Treaty of Portsmouth
1906 Nobel Peace Prize
Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907
College football meetings
Bureau of Investigation
Department of Commerce and Labor
Bureau of Corporations
Keep Commission
Inland Waterways Commission
Bureau of the Census
Great White Fleet
Perdicaris incident
Cabinet
White House West Wing
State of the Union Address, 1901
1906
1908
White House desk
Federal judiciary appointments
Other
events
Spanish–American War
Rough Riders
Battle of Las Guasimas
Battle of San Juan Hill
"Bull Moose" Progressive Party
New Nationalism
Assassination attempt
Boone and Crockett Club
Smithsonian–Roosevelt African Expedition
"River of Doubt" Amazonian expedition
Life and
homes
Birthplace, boyhood home replica
Sagamore Hill Home and Museum
Oyster Bay
Elkhorn Ranch
Maltese Cross Cabin
Pine Knot cabin
Gravesite
Writings
and speeches
Theodore Roosevelt bibliography
The Naval War of 1812 (1882 book)
"The Strenuous Life" (1899 speech)
"Citizenship in a Republic" (1910 speech)
"I have just been shot" (1912 speech)
The Forum magazine articles
Theodore Roosevelt Cyclopedia
Archival collections
Elections
New York state election, 1898
Republican National Convention, 1900
1904
1912
1916
United States presidential election, 1900
1904
1912
Legacy
Mount Rushmore
Theodore Roosevelt Center and Digital Library
White House Roosevelt Room
Theodore Roosevelt National Park
Theodore Roosevelt Wilderness
Theodore Roosevelt Island
Roosevelt National Forest
Roosevelt Study Center
Theodore Roosevelt Association
Theodore Roosevelt Memorial Park
Monument Assemblage
Roosevelt River
Theodore Roosevelt Award
Roosevelt Road
Postage stamps
Theodore Roosevelt, Rough Rider sculpture
Equestrian statue
Popular
culture
Teddy bear
"Speak softly, and carry a big stick"
Books
Films
Roosevelt in Africa 1910 documentary
The Roosevelts 2014 documentary
Related
Political positions
Bully pulpit
Ananias Club
Nature fakers
Progressive Era
A Guest of Honor
Porcellian Club
Muckraker
National Collegiate Athletic Association
Family
Alice Hathaway Lee (first wife)
Edith Kermit Carow (second wife)
Alice Lee Roosevelt (daughter)
Theodore Roosevelt III (son)
Kermit Roosevelt (son)
Ethel Carow Roosevelt (daughter)
Archibald Roosevelt (son)
Quentin Roosevelt (son)
Theodore Roosevelt, Sr. (father)
Martha Stewart Bulloch (mother)
Anna Roosevelt (sister)
Elliott Bulloch Roosevelt (brother)
Corinne Roosevelt (sister)
Cornelius Roosevelt (paternal grandfather)
James Stephens Bulloch (maternal grandfather)
James A. Roosevelt (paternal uncle)
Robert Roosevelt (paternal uncle)
James Dunwoody Bulloch (maternal half-uncle)
Irvine Bulloch (maternal uncle)
Theodore Douglas Robinson (nephew)
Corinne Robinson (niece)
Anna Eleanor Roosevelt (niece)
Hall Roosevelt (nephew)
← William McKinley
William Howard Taft →
 Category
v
t
e
National parks of the United States
Acadia
American Samoa
Arches
Badlands
Big Bend
Biscayne
Black Canyon of the Gunnison
Bryce Canyon
Canyonlands
Capitol Reef
Carlsbad Caverns
Channel Islands
Congaree
Crater Lake
Cuyahoga Valley
Death Valley
Denali
Dry Tortugas
Everglades
Gates of the Arctic
Glacier
Glacier Bay
Grand Canyon
Grand Teton
Great Basin
Great Sand Dunes
Great Smoky Mountains
Guadalupe Mountains
Haleakalā
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes
Hot Springs
Isle Royale
Joshua Tree
Katmai
Kenai Fjords
Kings Canyon
Kobuk Valley
Lake Clark
Lassen Volcanic
Mammoth Cave
Mesa Verde
Mount Rainier
North Cascades
Olympic
Petrified Forest
Pinnacles
Redwood
Rocky Mountain
Saguaro
Sequoia
Shenandoah
Theodore Roosevelt
Virgin Islands
Voyageurs
Wind Cave
Wrangell–St. Elias
Yellowstone
Yosemite
Zion
List of national parks of the United States (by elevation)
v
t
e
Protected areas of North Dakota
National Parks
Theodore Roosevelt
National Historic Sites
Fort Union Trading Post
Knife River Indian Villages
National Wildlife Refuges
Appert Lake
Ardoch
Arrowwood
Audubon
Bone Hill Creek
Brumba
Buffalo Lake
Camp Lake
Canfield Lake
Chase Lake
Cottonwood Lake
Dakota Lake
Des Lacs
Florence Lake
Halfway Lake
Hiddenwood
Hobart Lake
Hutchinson Lake
J. Clark Salyer
Johnson Lake
Kellys Slough
Lake Alice
Lake George
Lake Ilo
Lake Nettie
Lake Otis
Lake Patricia
Lake Zahl
Lambs Lake
Little Goose
Long Lake
Lords Lake
Lost Lake
Maple River
McLean
Pleasant Lake
Pretty Rock
Rabb Lake
Rock Lake
Rose Lake
School Section Lake
Shell Lake
Sheyenne Lake
Sibley Lake
Silver Lake
Slade
Snyder Lake
Springwater
Stewart Lake
Stoney Slough
Storm Lake
Stump Lake
Sullys Hill National Game Preserve
Sunburst Lake
Tewaukon
Tomahawk
Upper Souris
White Lake
Wild Rice
Willow Lake
Wintering River
Wood Lake
National Grasslands
Cedar River
Dakota Prairie
Little Missouri
Sheyenne
U.S. Wilderness Areas
Chase Lake
Lostwood
Theodore Roosevelt
Other Federal
International Peace Garden
North Country National Scenic Trail
State
Parks
Beaver Lake
Cross Ranch
Fort Abraham
Fort Ransom
Fort Stevenson
Grahams Island
Icelandic
Lake Metigoshe
Lake Sakakawea
Lewis and Clark
Little Missouri
Sully Creek
Turtle River
Recreation areas
Butte Saint Paul
Crow Flies High
Black Tiger Bay
Doyle Memorial
Indian Hills
Little Metigoshe
Pelican Point
Pembina Gorge
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theodore_Roosevelt_National_Park&amp;oldid=700080683"					
				Categories: IUCN Category IITheodore Roosevelt National ParkBadlandsProtected areas of Billings County, North DakotaProtected areas of McKenzie County, North DakotaCivilian Conservation Corps campsCivilian Conservation Corps in North DakotaProtected areas established in 19781978 establishments in North DakotaPaleontology in North DakotaHidden categories: Coordinates on Wikidata				
			Navigation menu
						Personal tools
							Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in						
						Namespaces
															Article
															Talk
							Variants
						Views
															Read
															Edit
															View history
						More
							Search
			Navigation
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
			Interaction
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
			Tools
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
			Print/export
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
			Languages
						БеларускаяБългарскиCatalàDanskDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançaisHrvatskiItalianoNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålپنجابیPolskiPortuguêsРусскийSuomiSvenskaTürkçe中文					
				Edit links			
											 This page was last modified on 16 January 2016, at 08:09.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											Cookie statement
											Mobile view

