Voyageurs National Park - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Early autumn in Voyageurs National Park
Location
Saint Louis County &amp; Koochiching County, Minnesota, USA
Nearestcity
International Falls
Coordinates
48°30′N 92°53′W﻿ / ﻿48.500°N 92.883°W﻿ / 48.500; -92.883Coordinates: 48°30′N 92°53′W﻿ / ﻿48.500°N 92.883°W﻿ / 48.500; -92.883
Area
218,200 acres (88,300ha)[1]
Established
April 8, 1975
Visitors
177,184 (in2011)[2]
Governingbody
National Park Service
Voyageurs National Park is a United States National Park in northern Minnesota near the town of International Falls. It was established in 1975. The park's name commemorates the voyageurs, French-Canadian fur traders who were the first European settlers to frequently travel through the area.[3] The park is notable for its outstanding water resources and is popular with canoeists, kayakers, other boaters and fishermen. The Kabetogama Peninsula, which lies entirely within the park and makes up most of its land area, is accessible only by boat. To the east of the National Park lies the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness.
The park has several boat ramps and visitor centers on its periphery, though the main body of the park is only accessible by boat or, in the winter, by snowmobile, ski, or snowshoe. In 2011 the park hosted 177,184 visitors.[2]
Contents
1 Geology
2 Access
3 Waters
4 Activities
4.1 Camping
4.2 Fishing
4.3 Boating
4.4 Hiking
4.5 In winter
5 History
5.1 First inhabitants
5.2 The Fur Trade
5.3 Logging
5.4 The Rainy Lake gold rush
5.5 Settlement and recreation
5.6 Commercial Fishing
6 Points of interest
6.1 Rainy Lake sites
6.2 Kabetogama Lake sites
6.3 Namakan Lake sites
6.4 Sand Point/Crane Lake sites
7 Weather
8 Warnings and safety
8.1 Boating safety
8.2 Winter
9 See also
10 References
11 External links
Geology[edit]
Voyageur National Park is located on the Canadian Shield, with the rocks averaging between 1 and 3 billion years old. Formed during the early ages of the earth formation, the rocks of the park were compressed, and folded under tremendous pressure. Then molten flows of lava intruded through the layers creating a mosaic of various gneiss and granites. Over time, additional layers of sedimentary rocks developed on top, to be stripped away by the continental glaciers of the Wisconsin Glacial epoch and earlier.[4]
Access[edit]
The largest city near Voyageurs National Park is International Falls, Minnesota. Unlike many other National Parks, where the main access to the park is by automobile or by foot, the primary access to the park is via water. Many visitors travel by canoe and kayak. Others rent house boats.[5] The park has three centers where visitors can obtain information about the park, view films, and see exhibits about the park's geology, wildlife, plants, and history.
Rainy Lake Visitor Center - is open all year and is located 12 miles (19km) east of International Falls at the end of Koochiching County Road 96, which is located off of State Highway 11 (MN 11), leaving International Falls.[5]
Kabetogama Lake Visitor Center - is located in the Kabetogama community on the southwestern edge of the park. This center is open seasonally. It can be reached, just 3 miles (5km) off of U.S. Highway 53 on Saint Louis County Road 122 and Saint Louis County Road 123.[5]
Ash River Visitor Center - is on the parks southern boundary just north of the community of Ash River. It can be reached, just 11 miles (18km) from U.S. Highway 53 on the Ash River Trail, Saint Louis County Road 129, taking the park road 1 mile (2km) before reaching Ash River.[5]
Ash River Visitor Center, aka Meadwood Lodge
Kabetogama Visitor Center
Rainy Lake Visitor Center
Waters[edit]
Kabetogama Lake Narrows
The park encompasses all or part of four major lakes:
Rainy Lake - 60 miles (97km) long, 929 miles (1,495km) of shoreline, 227,604 acres (921.1km2),[6] 161 feet (49m) max depth
Kabetogama Lake - 15 miles (24km) long, 78 miles (126km) of shoreline, 25,760 acres (104.2km2),[6] 80 feet (24m) max depth
Namakan Lake - 16 miles (26km) long, 146 miles (235km) of shoreline, 25,130 acres (101.7km2),[6] 150 feet (46m) max depth
Sand Point Lake - 8 miles (13km) long, 92 miles (148km) of shoreline, 5,179 acres (21.0km2),[6] 184 feet (56m) max depth
Of these, Namakan, Rainy and Sand Point lakes straddle the United States-Canada border. Lake Namakan and Sand Point Lake are accessible only by boat except in the winter. The southern boundary of the park is the northern shore of Crane Lake. The park has many smaller lakes, especially on the Kabetogama peninsula. Most popular of these are on the Locator Lakes trail. In all the park has more than 344 square miles (890km2) of water.
Activities[edit]
Camping[edit]
Campsite, Voyageurs National Park
Campsites are maintained by the National Park Service and are accessible only by water. The 175 sites are classified as tent, houseboat, or day-use sites; all are designated by signs. Tenters may not camp in houseboat sites or day-use sites. Maps showing the location of these sites are available at the visitor centers. Permits are required for overnight stays. Permits can be obtained at any park visitor center or boat ramp. Public and private campgrounds, accessible by car, are located near the perimeter of the park.[5]
Fishing[edit]
The major lakes in the park are home to Walleye, Northern pike, Muskellunge, Smallmouth bass, and Crappie. In the minor lakes that dot the park, Largemouth bass, Lake trout, Bluegill and other small sunfish and Yellow Perch are also found, although not every lake has every species. For example, Lake Trout are found primarily in Cruiser Lake north of Kettle Falls. Shoepack and Root (Little Shoepack) lakes in the center of the park's peninsula are home to the Shoepack strain of Muskellunge, distinctly different from the Mississippi strain (or Leech Lake strain) found throughout southern Minnesota and Wisconsin. Lake Whitefish are also a popular quarry via sport netting in the fall when they move into shallow water to spawn.[7]
Boating[edit]
Visitors travel and explore the park's lakes and islands with canoes, kayaks and motorboats. The park's interior peninsula is only accessible by boat except when frozen lakes provide outer routes. The park has a system of canoes and boats available for rental at interior lakes. During summer months, the park also offers shuttle service to an interior lake, as well as ranger-led boat tours that explore the park's natural features and history.
Hiking[edit]
The park has over 50 miles (80km) of hiking trails. While some trails are located on the mainland, the majority traverse the park's interior peninsula, including long-distance backcountry trails.
The park has many species of birds, like this gray jay, that breed within the park's boreal forest habitat
In winter[edit]
Snowmobiling in Voyageurs National Park
The park is snow-covered from late November until early April. Available activities include snowmobiling, cross-country skiing, winter camping, ice fishing and snowshoe hiking. Snowmobiling is limited to the frozen lake surfaces and the Chain of Lakes Scenic Trail through the center of the Kabetogama Peninsula. Trail maps should be used and can be obtained from the visitor centers.[5]
The use of snowmobiles in Voyageurs National Park, like in Yellowstone, is controversial, with opponents claiming they damage the natural beauty of the park and adversely affect wildlife.
Designated Snowmobile Trails
Rainy Lake Trail is 28 miles (45km) long running from Black Bay (the Rainy Lake Visitor Center) to Kettle Falls. It runs along the northern shore of the Kabetogama Peninsula, running inside the off shore islands. As it nears Kettle Falls, it turns south up a deep bay and then overland to avoid the soft ice along the narrows.[8]
The Kettle Falls Trail is 7.4 miles (12km) runs overland along the narrows, avoiding the soft and fractured ice of the narrows, until reaching the western end of Namakan Lake.
The Rudder Bay Trail is a short connecting trail acround the north side of the western Namakan Lake and Voyageur narrows, to the Ash River Visitor Center. Here, it joins into the Voyageur Trail.[8]
The Voyageur Trail is a multiple segmented trail, beginning near the Thunderbird Lodge. From Black Bay (Rainy Lake Visitor Center), it is nearly 6 miles (10km) long to the junction with the Chain of Lakes Trail on the Kabetogama Peninsula. An additional 3.5 miles (6km) crossing the west end of Kabetogama Lake brings you into the Kabetogama community with a short 1 mile (2km) or so drop around the point to the Kabetogama Visitor Center. In the Kabetogama community, there are linkes to the Arrowhead Trail, Woody's Trail, Peterson Bay Trail, Tone Dawg Trail, and the Ray Access Spur.[8]
After leaving the Kabetogama Visitor Center, the Voyageur Trail crosses the south side of Kabetogama Lake for 7 miles (11km), to the Kabetogama Narrows (Ash River Visitor Center) and the Rudder Bay Trail. Another 3 miles (5km) brings it to Ash River. In Ash River, there are links to other trails, including Bill Morgan Trail and the 'Ash River Links" to both the Arrowhead Trail and Crane Lake. By staying on the Voyageur Trail, you'll cross the southern shore of Namakan Lake and then turn south through Nakd Point Lake, Mukoda Lake and Crane Lake to Crane. This last link is 28 miles (45km) long. The entire length of the Voyageur Trail is about 37 miles (60km).[8]
History[edit]
The park was first proposed in April 1891 by the Minnesota Legislature in a resolution requesting that the president create a national park in the state. It wasn't until nearly eighty years later that federal legislation authorizing the creation of the park was signed into law by President Richard Nixon on January 8, 1971.
First inhabitants[edit]
Voyageurs National Park has been occupied by humans for nearly 10,000 years. During the Paleo-Indian Period, people entered this area as the waters from glacial Lake Agassiz receded. Then during the Archaic Period (8,000 B.C. - 100 B.C.) nomadic people moved with the animals they hunted and with the ripening grains. Fishing grew into a major source of food during this time. The Woodland Period (100 A.D.- 900 A.D.) saw an increase in the use of the wild rice. Beginning around this time, they used ceramics to create small, side-notched triangular projectile points began to appear.[9]
The Fur Trade[edit]
European exploration began about 1688. French explorer Jacques de Noyon wintered along the Rainy River. But it was the demand for beaver pelts that brought the fur traders. As competition in the east depleted the beaver, the voyageurs expanded their range into the northwest territories of North America. Here along the modern border of the United States and Canada, the Cree, Monsoni, and Assiniboine tribes were first Native American contacts. By the mid-18th century these people had abandoned the Rainy Lake area, to the Ojibwe. By 1780 the Ojibwe were the primary residents on the border. They filled key roles as suppliers of food, furs, and canoes.[10]
Logging[edit]
Logging came to the northwoods as the stands of white pine in Michigan, Wisconsin and central Minnesota were harvested. Beginning in the 1880s and 1890s, logging grew until there were two major logging companies. The International Logging Company in Koochiching County used sawmills at International Falls and Fort Frances until 1937. It was the constant need for water that caused the dams to be constructed at International Falls, Kettle Falls, and Squirrel Falls in the early 1900s. The Virginia and Rainy Lake Lumber Company harvested trees to the east in Saint Louis County. They rafted logs down river to Hoist Bay until 1929. Hoist Bay is named for the machinery used to 'hoist' floating logs out of the lake. Trains then took them to sawmills in Virginia, Minnesota. The logging has altered the composition of the forest. Where white and red pine once dominated the forest, they are a minor part. Few stands of large, mature trees exist in the park.[11]
The Rainy Lake gold rush[edit]
In the summer of 1893 George Davis, funded by Charles Moore, discovered gold on Rainy Lake. Davis was on a small island near Black Bay Narrows. Here, he found a gold-bearing quartz vein. The "Little American" discovery gave rise to the islands modern name, Little American Island. With confirmation of the discovery, Charles Moore hired Jeff Hildreth, a miner from the Black Hills to obtain title to the island. In the spring of 1894, development of the mine and of the nearby Rainy Lake City began. Rainy Lake City was incorporated on March 17, 1894.[12] By summer the city was a community of several hundred people. It had a school house, bank, general store, hotels, restaurants, a newspaper, hardware store, butcher shop, and several saloons. With the development of the Little American Mine, other prospectors entered into the search. Mining remains which can still be seen include those of the Lyle Mine north of Dryweed Island, the Big American Mine on Big American Island, the Bushyhead Mine on Bushyhead Island, and the Soldier Mine on Dryweed Island. The low production from the mines ended the rush with a bust by 1898. The town of Rainy Lake City was gone by 1901.[13]
Settlement and recreation[edit]
When the park was established in 1975, there were over 60 resorts around the park. Within the park, there were 12 resorts, 97 leased cabin sites, and over 120 privately owned recreational homes. Many sold their land and buildings to the park. Some people chose to sell their property and leave immediately, while others chose to sell their property, but maintain use for either a lifetime tenancy or a 25-year use and occupancy reservation. As these properties are vacated, the park will remove many structures to restore natural conditions. Twenty properties, containing over 50 structures, will be retained and managed by the National Park Service because of their historic significance.
Commercial Fishing[edit]
Large fishing operations began on the Rainy River in 1892. By the 1890s and early 1900s, seven or eight fishing companies operated in the area. Most were down on Crane Lake. The main production was caviar, taken from the eggs of lake sturgeon. Most fell by the wayside as long distances and a lack of refrigeration affected the industry. By the 1930s all the large operations were gone.
Family fishing replaced the large operations. By 1910 there were around 48 family business'. The catch was sold at local auctions held at Kettle Falls. By 1923, commercial fishing was banned on Kabetogama Lake. By 1942 only 10 licensed family operations were active. Old fishing camps and net-tarring sites still exist in the park. The best preserved is the Oveson Fish Camp (c. 1950s).[14]
Points of interest[edit]
Rainy Lake sites[edit]
Kettle Falls Hotel
Kettle Falls is located between Lake Namakan and Rainy Lake, and is the location of the Kettle Falls Hotel. The hotel was constructed in 1910 by timber baron Ed Rose and operated as a hotel and resort to this day. It was placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1976. Kettle Falls can only be reached by boat in the summer months and is one of the few places in the lower forty-eight states where one looks south into Canada.[15][16]
Anderson Bay
Anderson Bay is a fine example of why the park was established. The bluffs of the Bay rise 80 feet (20m) above the water. From the top, there are views of the bay and Rainy Lake. Anderson Bay is the northern trailhead for the Cruiser Lake Trail system. From the landing, a loop trail goes to the top of the bluffs. Anderson Bay is two-thirds of the way from Rainy Lake Visitor Center to Kettle Point. It is on the north side of the Kabetogama Peninsula.[16]
Surveyor’s Island
Surveyor’s Island is on the east end of Rainy Lake marking the entry to the American Channel to Kettle Falls. Here the boundary surveyors had a campsite during the early 1900s. Voyageurs would use this island as a stop before they entered the open waters of Rainy Lake.[16]
Camp Marston
Camp Marston was Iowa State University operated a summer camp from 1922 until 1940. Civil engineering students would attend the camp. Today there is still a cabin known as “Polaris,” where the professors lived and foundations and chimneys from other structures.
Rainy Lake City
Rainy Lake City was a boom town in the 1890s during a short gold rush period. The site has a longer history of use than just the gold rush. A saloon still stands and is proposed as a shelter for exhibits. Former streets and archeological remains of buildings can be seen. Rainy Lake City is the northwestern point of the Kabetogama Peninsula facing Little American Island and the mainland.[16]
Harry Oveson Fish Camp
Oveson’s fish camp is an intact commercial fishing camp. There are still several structures, including Oveson house, ice house, and fish processing building.[16]
Little American Island
Little American Island is on Rainy Lake just north of the mainland. It is the furthest western island in the park. It was the site of gold discovery in 1893. The island has been upgraded to provide an accessible trail, a comfort station and dock.[16]
Kabetogama Lake sites[edit]
Kabetogama boat harbor and Tour Boat
Ellsworth Rock Gardens
The Gardens was an enchanting sculpture once filled with flowers. Mr. Ellsworth created his garden as a part of the families summer home. Boat tours from Kabetogama Visitor Center visit this site on the northern shore of Kabetogama Lake.[16]
Hacksaw Pass
Here, visitors may visit several wetlands, the Gold Portage, Woodenfrog family residence and other sites related to Ojibwe history.[16]
Namakan Lake sites[edit]
Hoist Bay
Hoist Bay has been an area of logging and seasonal recreation. You can spot piers of the former railroad trestle, and buildings from, the resort era. The area is set up for day use.[16] The bay is located on the southern shore of Namakan Lake, east of Ash River and the visitor center.
Moose River Indian Village
Moose River, enters Moose Bay, west of Hoist Bay. The Bois Forte Ojibwe once occupied the area from the 1760s through the 1930s. They lived in the area of the park until the Nett Lake reservation was established. Five bands lived throughout the park, including the west end of Kabetogama Lake, Kettle Falls, Black Bay on Rainy Lake, Crane Lake, and Moose River of Namakan Lake.[16]
I.W.Stevens Pine Cove Resort
The I.W.Stevens Pine Cove Resort represents the resort recreation period. The site’s historic buildings are set among large scenic pine trees. The site consists of I.W. Stevens’ home, a guest cabin, sauna, generator shed, and root cellar. I.W. Stevens acquired the property from the Virginia &amp; Rainy Lake Lumber Company. The company chose not to cut the red pine on the site and many of the trees have reached a large, mature state.[16]
Sand Point/Crane Lake sites[edit]
Casareto Summer Cabin
The Casareto Summer Cabin is an example of summer recreational cabins in the park. It is located on a sand beach.[16]
Grassy Bay
Grassy Bay is a large western bay on Sand Point Lake. It is rich in natural and cultural resources. The cliffs are well-known among park visitors. The Mittet cabin is an example of early recreation (1880s- 1920s).[16]
Ingersoll Estate
The Ingersoll lodge was built by Illinois philanthropist William Ingersoll in 1928. The estate is visible from the lake just north of Harrison Narrows.[16]
Weather[edit]
Climate data for International Falls, Minnesota
Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Year
Average high °F
12
20
33
50
65
74
78
76
64
52
32
18
48
Average low °F
−9
−3
10
27
39
49
54
52
42
33
17
0
26
Average rainfall inches
0.8
0.7
1
1.6
2.5
3.8
3.39
3
3.1
1.8
1.3
0.9
24.4
Average snowfall inches
12.4
9.4
9.6
5.8
0.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
1.8
12
12.1
64
Average high °C
−11
−7
1
10
18
23
26
24
18
11
0
−8
8
Average low °C
−23
−19
−12
−3
4
9
12
11
6
1
−8
−18
−3
Average rainfall mm
20
18
30
41
64
97
86.1
80
79
46
33
23
620
Average snowfall cm
31.5
23.9
24.4
14.7
2
0
0
0
0.3
4.6
30
30.7
163
Source: [17]
Warnings and safety[edit]
Boating safety[edit]
Safe channels are marked in the main lakes by the U.S. Coast Guard. When upbound in the lakes, there are green numbered buoys that mark the 'left' or port side of the channel. Red number buoys mark the 'right' or starboard side. It is the opposite when downbound. For Rainy Lake and Namakan Lake, upbound is going east. For Kabetogama Lake, upbound is going west. If you're on Sand Point Lake or Crane Lake, upbound is going south.[5]
Hazardous rocks are common throughout the park and can lie just beneath the surface. Less than ten percent of these hazards are marked. The park consists of parallel ridges of rock, which form the islands and the peninsula.[5]
Winter[edit]
Snowmobiling is a major recreational activity during the winter months. In the heart of the season, the most hazardous areas regarding thin ice or open water are along the river channels including places like Rainy River or any of the narrows. The current under the ice causes pressure ridges and soft spots. Snowmobiles generally avoid these areas.[5]
See also[edit]
Grand Portage National Monument, historic Voyageur site
Fur trade
Fort Beauharnois, French trading post
Fort St. Charles, French trading fort on the Manitoba and Minnesota border
Fort St. Pierre, trading post built by La Vérendrye on Rainy Lake
Fort Kaministiquia, French and English post on Lake Superior
Lake of the Woods
North American fur trade
Voyageurs National Park Association
References[edit]
^ "Listing of acreage as of December 31, 2011". Land Resource Division, National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-07.
^ a b "NPS Annual Recreation Visits Report". National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-07.
^ "Voyageurs National Park - People". National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-07.
^ "Voyageurs National Park - Natural Features &amp; Ecosystems". National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-07.
^ a b c d e f g h i "Rendezvous - Your Guide to Voyageurs National Park" (PDF). National Park Service. Spring 2011 – Winter 2012. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2012-03-08. Retrieved 2012-03-08.
^ a b c d "Voyageurs National Park - Introduction" (PDF). National park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-08.
^ "LakeFinder". Minnesota Department of Natural Resources. Retrieved 2012-03-08.
^ a b c d "Voyageur Snowmobile Trail System Maps". Snowmobilevacation.org. Retrieved 2012-03-08.
^ "Voyageurs National Park - The First People". National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-08.
^ "Voyageurs National Park - The Fur Trade". National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-08.
^ "Voyageurs National Park - Logging". National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-08.
^ Schwankl, Hermoine Gordon (1983). "The History Of Koochiching County". Koochiching County. Retrieved 2012-03-08.
^ "Voyageurs National Park - Mining". National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-08.
^ "Voyageurs National Park - Commercial Fishing". National Park Service. Retrieved 2012-03-08.
^ "Kettle Falls Hotel". Retrieved 2012-03-08.
^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n "Visitor Destinations" (PDF). Voyageur National Park. Retrieved 2012-03-08.
^ "International Falls, Minnesota". Weatherbase. Retrieved 2012-03-08.
External links[edit]
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Voyageurs National Park.
Find more about
Voyageurs National Park
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from Commons
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
National Park Service: Voyageurs National Park
Voyageurs National Park at NASA Earth Observatory
Minnesota DNR Lakefinder
v
t
e
Protected areas of Minnesota
National
Parks
Voyageurs
Monuments
Grand Portage
Pipestone
Rivers
Mississippi National River and Recreation Area
Saint Croix National Scenic Riverway
Scenic Trails
North Country Trail
Wildlife
Refuges
Agassiz
Big Stone
Crane Meadows
Glacial Ridge
Hamden Slough
Mille Lacs
Minnesota Valley
Northern Tallgrass Prairie
Rice Lake
Rydell
Sherburne
Tamarac
Upper Mississippi River
Wetland
Management
Districts
Big Stone
Detroit Lakes
Fergus Falls
Litchfield
Minnesota Valley
Morris
Windom
Forests
Chippewa
Superior
Natural
Landmarks
Ancient River Warren Channel
Cedar Creek Ecosystem Science Reserve
Itasca Natural Area
Keeley Creek Natural Area
Lac la Croix Research Natural Area
Lake Agassiz Peatlands Natural Area
Pine Point Research Natural Area
Upper Red Lake Peatland
Wilderness
Agassiz
Boundary Waters Canoe Area
Tamarac
State
Parks
Afton
Banning
Bear Head Lake
Beaver Creek Valley
Big Stone Lake
Blue Mounds
Buffalo River
Camden
Carley
Cascade River
Charles A. Lindbergh
Crow Wing
Father Hennepin
Flandrau
Forestville Mystery Cave
Fort Ridgely
Fort Snelling
Franz Jevne
Frontenac
George H. Crosby Manitou
Glacial Lakes
Glendalough
Gooseberry Falls
Grand Portage
Great River Bluffs
Hayes Lake
Hill-Annex Mine
Interstate
Itasca
Jay Cooke
John A. Latsch
Judge C. R. Magney
Kilen Woods
Lac qui Parle
Lake Bemidji
Lake Bronson
Lake Carlos
Lake Louise
Lake Maria
Lake Shetek
Lake Vermilion
Maplewood
McCarthy Beach
Mille Lacs Kathio
Minneopa
Monson Lake
Moose Lake
Myre-Big Island
Nerstrand-Big Woods
Old Mill
Rice Lake
Saint Croix
Sakatah Lake
Savanna Portage
Scenic
Schoolcraft
Sibley
Soudan Underground Mine
Split Rock Creek
Split Rock Lighthouse
Temperance River
Tettegouche
Upper Sioux Agency
Whitewater
Wild River
William O'Brien
Zippel Bay
Recreation
Areas
Big Bog
Cuyuna Country
Garden Island
Greenleaf Lake
Iron Range Off-Highway Vehicle Area
Minnesota Valley
Red River
Forests
Badoura
Battleground
Bear Island
Beltrami Island
Big Fork
Birch Lakes
Blackduck
Bowstring
Buena Vista
Burntside
Chengwatana
Cloquet Valley
Crow Wing
D.A.R.
Emily
Finland
Fond du Lac
Foot Hills
General C. C. Andrews
George Washington
Golden Anniversary
Grand Portage
Hill River
Huntersville
Insula Lake
Jeanette
Kabetogama
Koochiching
Lake Isabella
Lake of the Woods
Land O'Lakes
Lost River
Lyons
Mississippi Headwaters
Nemadji
Northwest Angle
Pat Bayle
Remer
Richard J. Dorer Memorial Hardwood
Rum River
Saint Croix
Sand Dunes
Savanna
Smokey Bear
Smoky Hills
Snake River
Solana
Sturgeon River
Two Inlets
Waukenabo
Wealthwood
Welsh Lake
White Earth
Whiteface River
Scientific and
Natural Areas
List of scientific and natural areas
Local
Parks
County and regional parks
Three Rivers Park District
Other
Minnesota
Historical
Society
Alexander Ramsey House
Birch Coulee Battlefield
Charles A. Lindbergh House
Comstock House
Folsom House
Forest History Center
Forestville
Fort Renville
Fort Ridgely
Fort Snelling
Grand Mound
Harkin's General Store
James J. Hill House
Jeffers Petroglyphs
Lac qui Parle Mission
Lower Sioux Agency
Marine Mill
Mill City Museum
Mille Lacs Indian Museum
Minnehaha Depot
Minnesota History Center
Minnesota State Capitol
Morrison Mounds
North West Company Post
Oliver H. Kelley Homestead
Sibley House Historic Site
Split Rock Lighthouse
Stumne Mounds
Traverse des Sioux
Upper Sioux Agency
W. W. Mayo House
Nature
centers
List of nature centers
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources
v
t
e
National parks of the United States
Acadia
American Samoa
Arches
Badlands
Big Bend
Biscayne
Black Canyon of the Gunnison
Bryce Canyon
Canyonlands
Capitol Reef
Carlsbad Caverns
Channel Islands
Congaree
Crater Lake
Cuyahoga Valley
Death Valley
Denali
Dry Tortugas
Everglades
Gates of the Arctic
Glacier
Glacier Bay
Grand Canyon
Grand Teton
Great Basin
Great Sand Dunes
Great Smoky Mountains
Guadalupe Mountains
Haleakalā
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes
Hot Springs
Isle Royale
Joshua Tree
Katmai
Kenai Fjords
Kings Canyon
Kobuk Valley
Lake Clark
Lassen Volcanic
Mammoth Cave
Mesa Verde
Mount Rainier
North Cascades
Olympic
Petrified Forest
Pinnacles
Redwood
Rocky Mountain
Saguaro
Sequoia
Shenandoah
Theodore Roosevelt
Virgin Islands
Voyageurs
Wind Cave
Wrangell–St. Elias
Yellowstone
Yosemite
Zion
List of national parks of the United States (by elevation)
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Voyageurs_National_Park&amp;oldid=700030049"					
				Categories: IUCN Category II1975 establishments in MinnesotaArchaeological sites in MinnesotaProtected areas established in 1975Protected areas of Koochiching County, MinnesotaProtected areas of St. Louis County, MinnesotaVoyageurs National ParkHidden categories: Coordinates on WikidataCommons category with local link same as on Wikidata				
			Navigation menu
						Personal tools
							Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in						
						Namespaces
															Article
															Talk
							Variants
						Views
															Read
															Edit
															View history
						More
							Search
			Navigation
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
			Interaction
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
			Tools
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
			Print/export
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
			Languages
						AfrikaansCatalàDanskDeutschفارسیFrançaisHrvatskiItalianoNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålپنجابیPolskiPortuguêsРусскийSuomiSvenskaTürkçe中文					
				Edit links			
											 This page was last modified on 15 January 2016, at 23:14.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											Cookie statement
											Mobile view

