Wind Cave National Park - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Wind Cave
Location
Custer County, South Dakota, USA
Nearestcity
Hot Springs, South Dakota
Coordinates
43°33′23″N 103°28′43″W﻿ / ﻿43.55635°N 103.47865°W﻿ / 43.55635; -103.47865Coordinates: 43°33′23″N 103°28′43″W﻿ / ﻿43.55635°N 103.47865°W﻿ / 43.55635; -103.47865
Area
33,847 acres (52.886sqmi; 13,697ha)[1]
Established
January 9, 1903
Visitors
538,394 (in2011)[2]
Governingbody
National Park Service
Black Hills and Badlands
Sculpture
Mount Rushmore
Crazy Horse
Geologic formations
Badlands
Needles
Devils Tower
Bear Butte
Spearfish Canyon
Mountains
Harney Peak
Caves
Wind Cave
Jewel Cave
Parks, forests, and grassland
Wind Cave
Custer State Park
Black Hills National Forest
Black Elk Wilderness
Buffalo Gap National Grassland
Lakes
Sylvan
Pactola
v
t
e
Calcite boxwork from Wind Cave. This boxwork is the result of differential dissolution of intensely fractured and veined limestone during cave formation.
Bison grazing on prairie grasses
Wind Cave National Park is a United States national park 10 miles (16km) north of the town of Hot Springs in western South Dakota. Established in 1903 by President Theodore Roosevelt, it was the seventh U.S. National Park and the first cave to be designated a national park anywhere in the world. The cave is notable for its displays of the calcite formation known as boxwork. Approximately 95 percent of the world's discovered boxwork formations are found in Wind Cave. Wind Cave is also known for its frostwork. The cave is also considered a three-dimensional maze cave, recognized as the densest (most passage volume per cubic mile) cave system in the world. The cave is currently the sixth-longest in the world with 140.47 miles (226.06km) of explored cave passageways,[3] with an average of four new miles of cave being discovered each year.[citation needed] Above ground, the park includes the largest remaining natural mixed-grass prairie in the United States.
Contents
1 Early knowledge
2 Source of cave's name
3 Early exploration and tours
4 Surface resources
5 See also
6 References
7 External links
Early knowledge[edit]
The Lakota, Cheyenne, and other Native American tribes who traveled through the area were aware of the cave's existence, as were early Euro-American settlers, but there has been no evidence yet discovered that anyone actually entered it.[4]
The Lakota (Sioux), an indigenous people who live in the Black Hills region of South Dakota, spoke of a hole that blew air, a place they consider sacred as the site where they first emerged from the underworld where they had lived before the demiurge creation of the world.[4]
The first documented discovery of the cave by White Americans was in 1881, when the brothers Tom and Jesse Bingham heard wind rushing out from a 10-inch (25cm) by 14-inch (36cm) hole in the ground. According to the story, when Tom looked into the hole, the "wind" (exiting cave air) blew his hat off of his head.[5]
Source of cave's name[edit]
Caves are said to "breathe," that is, air continually moves into or out of a cave, equalizing the atmospheric pressure of the cave and the outside air. When the air pressure is higher outside the cave than in it, air flows into the cave, raising cave's pressure to match the outside pressure. When the air pressure inside the cave is higher than outside it, air flows out of it, lowering the air pressure within the cave.[5] A large cave (such as Wind Cave) with only a few small openings will "breathe" more obviously than a small cave with many large openings.
Rapid weather changes, accompanied by rapid barometric changes, are a feature of Western South Dakota weather. If a fast-moving storm was approaching on the day the Bingham brothers found the cave, the atmospheric pressure would have been dropping fast, causing the cave's higher-pressure air to rush out all available openings, creating the "wind" for which Wind Cave was named.
Early exploration and tours[edit]
From 1881 to 1889, few people ventured far into Wind Cave. Then in 1889 the South Dakota Mining Company hired Jesse D. McDonald to oversee their "mining claim" on the cave site. The South Dakota Mining Company may have hoped to find minerals of value, or it may from the start have had commercial development of the cave in mind.[6]
No valuable mineral deposits were found, and the McDonald family began developing the cave for tourism. Jesse initially hired his son Alvin (age 16 in 1890) and, beginning in 1891, Alvin's brother Elmer, to explore and help develop the cave.[7] Alvin fell in love with the cave and kept a cave diary.[8] Others who worked at Wind Cave and helped explore it between 1890 and 1903 include Katie Stabler, Emma McDonald (Elmer's wife), Inez McDonald (Emma and Elmer's daughter), and Tommy McDonald (brother of Elmer and Alvin).[4]
By February 1892 the cave was open for visitors;[9] the standard tour fee was apparently $1.00,[10] which was a significant sum of money at the time.
Tourists, with their guide, explored the cave by candlelight. These early tours were physically demanding and sometimes involved crawling through narrow passages.
Like the nearby Jewel Cave National Monument, currently the third longest cave, Herb and Jan Conn played an important role in cave exploration during the 1960s.
Surface resources[edit]
A United States National Park ranger stands at the natural entrance of Wind Cave.
Wind Cave National Park protects a diverse ecosystem with eastern and western plant and animal species. Some of the more visible animals include elk (also called wapiti), bison, black-footed ferrets, pronghorn and prairie dogs. The Wind Cave bison herd is one of only four free-roaming and genetically pure herds on public lands in North America. The other three herds are the Yellowstone Park bison herd, the Henry Mountains bison herd in Utah and on Elk Island in Alberta, Canada. The Wind Cave bison herd is currently brucellosis-free.[5]
Several roads run through the park and there are 30 miles (48km) of hiking trails, so almost the entire park is accessible. The park had an estimated 577,141 visitors in 2010.[2] More than 109,000 people toured the cave itself in 2015, the most since 1968 before cave tours were limited to 40 people each.[11]
The Wind Cave Visitor Center features three exhibit rooms about the geology of the caves and early cave history, the park's wildlife and natural history, and the work of the Civilian Conservation Corps in the park.
Elk Mountain Campground, located in a ponderosa pine forest, is about 1.25 miles (2.0km) from the visitor center. There are 75 sites for tents and recreational vehicles. It is open year round with campfire programs offered in the summer and limited services available in the winter.[5] As of March 2013, the campground has been closed due to budget cuts stemming from the United States budget sequestration law. However, the decision to close the campground was reversed, and it has been available since May24, 2013.[12] One campground loop remains closed, and there are no evening programs in the campground amphitheater.
See also[edit]
Jewel Cave National Monument
Great Basin National Park (Lehman Caves)
Mammoth Cave National Park
Oregon Caves National Monument
Russell Cave National Monument
Timpanogos Cave National Monument
References[edit]
^ "Listing of acreage as of December 31, 2011". Land Resource Division, National Park Service. Retrieved March 7, 2012.
^ a b "NPS Annual Recreation Visits Report". National Park Service. Retrieved March 7, 2012.
^ Bob Gulden (May 13, 2013). "Worlds longest caves". Geo2 Committee on Long and Deep Caves. National Speleological Society (NSS). Retrieved June 12, 2013.
^ a b c National Park Service: Early cave explorers
^ a b c d Wind Cave brochure, National Park Service, GPO, WDC
^ http://www.nps.gov/wica/historyculture/alvin_mcdonald.htm
^ McDonald, Alvin Frank. A Private Account of A. F. McDonald, Permanent Guide of Wind Cave (a.k.a. "Alvin McDonald Diary," written 1891-1893). Facsimile ed., no pub. data. Sold through Wind Cave National Park. Financial entries, pp. 20-21 and 23-25.
^ http://www.nps.gov/wica/historyculture/alvin-mcdonalds-diary-text.htm
^ McDonald, Alvin Frank. A Private Account of A. F. McDonald, Permanent Guide of Wind Cave (a.k.a. "Alvin McDonald Diary," written 1891-1893). Facsimile ed., no pub. data. Sold through Wind Cave National Park. Financial entries, p. 9
^ McDonald, Alvin Frank. A Private Account of A. F. McDonald, Permanent Guide of Wind Cave (a.k.a. "Alvin McDonald Diary," written 1891-1893). Facsimile ed., no pub. data. Sold through Wind Cave National Park. Financial entries, p. 8-9
^ Kent, Jim (January 19, 2016). "Wind Cave Numbers Highest In 40 Years". South Dakota Public Broadcasting. Retrieved January 19, 2016.
^ Garrigan, Mary (8 May 2013). "Elk Mountain campground reopens May 24". Rapid City Journal. Retrieved 2013-06-12.
External links[edit]
Find more about
Wind Cave National Park
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from Commons
Travel guide from Wikivoyage
National Park Service.org: Official Wind Cave National Park website
Wikimedia Commons has media related to Wind Cave National Park.
v
t
e
National parks of the United States
Acadia
American Samoa
Arches
Badlands
Big Bend
Biscayne
Black Canyon of the Gunnison
Bryce Canyon
Canyonlands
Capitol Reef
Carlsbad Caverns
Channel Islands
Congaree
Crater Lake
Cuyahoga Valley
Death Valley
Denali
Dry Tortugas
Everglades
Gates of the Arctic
Glacier
Glacier Bay
Grand Canyon
Grand Teton
Great Basin
Great Sand Dunes
Great Smoky Mountains
Guadalupe Mountains
Haleakalā
Hawaiʻi Volcanoes
Hot Springs
Isle Royale
Joshua Tree
Katmai
Kenai Fjords
Kings Canyon
Kobuk Valley
Lake Clark
Lassen Volcanic
Mammoth Cave
Mesa Verde
Mount Rainier
North Cascades
Olympic
Petrified Forest
Pinnacles
Redwood
Rocky Mountain
Saguaro
Sequoia
Shenandoah
Theodore Roosevelt
Virgin Islands
Voyageurs
Wind Cave
Wrangell–St. Elias
Yellowstone
Yosemite
Zion
List of national parks of the United States (by elevation)
v
t
e
Black Hills of South Dakota and Wyoming
Attractions
Bear Butte
Black Elk Wilderness
Black Hills Central Railroad
Black Hills National Forest
Black Hills Playhouse
Chapel in the Hills
Crazy Horse Memorial
Custer State Park
Devils Tower
Dinosaur Park
Flintstones Bedrock City
Harney Peak
Homestake Mine
Jewel Cave National Monument
Mammoth Site
Minuteman Missile National Historic Site
Mount Rushmore National Memorial
Mystic Miner Ski Resort
Needles
Pactola Lake
Reptile Gardens
Rushmore Cave
Sheridan Lake
Sitting Bull Crystal Caverns
Sturgis Motorcycle Rally
Sylvan Lake
Terry Peak ski area
Wind Cave National Park with bison herd
Scenic routes
Roads
Norbeck Scenic Byway
Iron Mountain Road
Needles Highway
Spearfish Canyon Scenic Byway
Trails
Mickelson Centennial Trail
Populated places
Cities
Belle Fourche
Central City
Custer
Deadwood
Edgemont
Hot Springs
Hill City
Lead
Newcastle
Rapid City
Spearfish
Sturgis
Whitewood
Towns
Buffalo Gap
Fairburn
Hermosa
Keystone
Pringle
Sundance
Unincorporated
Dewey
Four Mile
Galena
Hanna
Johnson Siding
Nemo
Rochford
Rockerville
Silver City
Three Forks
History and people
Native American
Cheyenne people
Lakota people
Treaty of Fort Laramie (1868) established the Great Sioux Reservation
Black Hills War, or Great Sioux War (1876)
Sitting Bull
Crazy Horse
Lone Horn
Red Cloud
Spotted Tail
Old West
Dakota Territory (1861–1889)
Black Hills Expedition (1874)
Black Hills Gold Rush (1874)
Newton–Jenney Party (1875)
Cheyenne-Black Hills Stage Route (1876-1887)
Sidney-Black Hills Stage Road (1876-1887)
Rapid City, Black Hills and Western Railroad (1893–1947)
Seth Bullock and Martha Bullock
General George Armstrong Custer
Dora DuFran
Black Elk
Wild Bill Hickok
Calamity Jane
Historian Doane Robinson
Sol Star
Al Swearengen
Charlie Utter
Ghost towns
Addie Camp
Bismuth
Blacktail
Burdock
Cambria
Carbonate
Etta
Flatiron
Greenwood
Maitland
Myers City
Nahant
Novak
Pactola
Sheridan
Spokane
Terraville
Tigerville
Tinton
Trojan
Modern
Fossil Cycad National Monument (1922-1957)
Stratobowl (1934-1959)
Black Hills flood (1972)
Sculptors Gutzon Borglum and Lincoln Borglum
Author Joseph Bottum
Politician Francis H. Case
Poet Charles Badger Clark
Historian Watson Parker
Road junctions
Carlile Junction
Cheyenne Crossing
Four Corners
Four Mile
Keystone Wye
Maverick Junction
Mule Creek Junction
v
t
e
Protected areas of South Dakota
Federal
National Parks
Badlands
Wind Cave
National Historic Sites
and Memorials
Minuteman Missile NHS
Mount Rushmore NMem
National Monument
Jewel Cave
National Forests
Black Hills
Custer
National Grasslands
Buffalo Gap
Dakota Prairie
Fort Pierre
Grand River
National Historic Trail
Lewis and Clark
National Recreational River
Missouri
National Wildlife Refuges
Huron WMD
Karl E. Mundt
Lacreek
Lake Andes
Madison WMD
Sand Lake
Sand Lake WMD
Waubay
Waubay WMD
National Wilderness Areas
Badlands
Black Elk
State
State Parks
Adams Homestead and Nature Preserve
Bear Butte
Custer
Fisher Grove
Fort Sisseton
Good Earth
Hartford Beach
Lake Herman
Newton Hills
Oakwood Lakes
Palisades
Roy Lake
Sica Hollow
Union Grove
State Recreation Areas
Angostura
Beaver Creek
Big Sioux
Big Stone Island
Burke Lake
Buryanek
Chief White Crane
Cow Creek
Farm Island
George S. Mickelson Trail
Indian Creek
LaFramboise Island
Lake Alvin
Lake Cochrane
Lake Hiddenwood
Lake Louise
Lake Poinsett
Lake Thompson
Lake Vermillion
Lewis and Clark
Little Moreau
Llewellyn Johns
Mina Lake
North Point
North Wheeler
Oahe Downstream
Okobojo Point
Pease Creek
Pelican Lake
Pickerel Lake
Pierson Ranch
Platte Creek
Randall Creek
Richmond Lake
Sandy Shore
Shadehill
Snake Creek
Spirit Mound Historic Prairie
Springfield
Swan Creek
Walker's Point
West Bend
West Pollack
West Whitlock
						Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wind_Cave_National_Park&amp;oldid=700641629"					
				Categories: IUCN Category IIWind Cave National ParkNational parks in South DakotaBlack HillsCaves of South DakotaProtected areas of Custer County, South DakotaArchaeological sites in South DakotaNative American archeologyBlowholes1903 establishments in South DakotaProtected areas established in 1903Civilian Conservation Corps in South DakotaLandforms of Custer County, South DakotaHidden categories: Coordinates on WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from February 2012Commons category with local link same as on Wikidata				
			Navigation menu
						Personal tools
							Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in						
						Namespaces
															Article
															Talk
							Variants
						Views
															Read
															Edit
															View history
						More
							Search
			Navigation
						Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store					
			Interaction
						HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page					
			Tools
						What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page					
			Print/export
						Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version					
			Languages
						CatalàČeštinaDanskDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançaisHrvatskiItalianoNederlands日本語Norsk bokmålPolskiPortuguêsРусскийSuomiSvenskaTürkçe中文					
				Edit links			
											 This page was last modified on 19 January 2016, at 19:19.
											Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
											Privacy policy
											About Wikipedia
											Disclaimers
											Contact Wikipedia
											Developers
											Cookie statement
											Mobile view

